The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Year Nine, by Anne Manning

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Year Nine
       A Tale of the Tyrol

Author: Anne Manning

Release Date: June 26, 2015 [EBook #49290]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YEAR NINE ***




Produced by Shaun Pinder, Elisa and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









[Illustration]




                   *       *       *       *       *


                            THE YEAR NINE.

                        _A Tale of the Tyrol._

                                  BY

                     THE AUTHOR OF "MARY POWELL."

               _Pro libertate victi, pro fama victores._

                                LONDON:

                Printed for ARTHUR HALL, VIRTUE, & CO.

                        25, _Paternoster Row_.

                                 1858.


                   *       *       *       *       *


                               CONTENTS.


                                                   PAGE
      CHAPTER I.

  THE THUNDER STORM                                   1

      CHAPTER II.

  THE INN KITCHEN                                    12

      CHAPTER III.

  THE SHOOTING MATCH                                 25

      CHAPTER IV.

  WOLFSTHRUN                                         40

      CHAPTER V.

  "'TIS TIME!"                                       47

      CHAPTER VI.

  THE FIRST SUCCESS                                  63

      CHAPTER VII.

  INNSBRUCK                                          78

      CHAPTER VIII.

  STILL SUCCESSFUL                                   92

      CHAPTER IX.

  HOME                                              103

      CHAPTER X.

  GUERILLA WARFARE                                  118

      CHAPTER XI.

  TYROLESE COURTSHIP                                130

      CHAPTER XII.

  BERG ISEL                                         145

      CHAPTER XIII.

  THE LATTER END OF A FRAY, AND THE BEGINNING OF A
  FEAST                                             159

      CHAPTER XIV.

  TROUBLED WATERS                                   171

      CHAPTER XV.

  THE GORGE OF THE EISACH                           182

      CHAPTER XVI.

  THE THIRD VICTORY OF BERG ISEL                    195

      CHAPTER XVII.

  REVERSES                                          210

      CHAPTER XVIII.

  DANGER                                            224

      CHAPTER XIX.

  WINTER ON THE MOUNTAINS                           239

      CHAPTER XX.

  THE CHÂLET                                        253

      CHAPTER XXI.

  TYRANNY RAMPANT, GRACE TRIUMPHANT                 266




[Illustration]




THE YEAR NINE.




CHAPTER I.

THE THUNDER STORM.


It was dusk; and the mountains were reverberating with loud
thunder-claps, while the rain helped to swell a turbid river that swept
through the valley, and past the door of a small _wirth-haus_ or inn,
known less by its sign of "The Crown," than as "am Sand," by reason of
the strip of sand on which it was built.

A cheerful looking, comely woman, clad in a superabundance of
woollen petticoats, was busy at the stove, cooking the supper of a
foot-traveller who read a crumpled newspaper at the window; while
surrounding the kitchen-table, three or four peasants, who had been
driven in by the rain, were hungrily supping milk-porridge from a
large bowl common to them all. A pretty girl of sixteen, after adding
to their meal a basket of coarse rye-cakes, spread a small table for
the stranger, who, as soon as his supper was served, fell upon it with
avidity. His hostess, meanwhile, retired to the end of the kitchen,
where there was a great meal-bin, and began to set the bread for the
morrow's baking, closely watched, all the time, by two little girls
with long braids of hair hanging down their backs.

"The thunder still rumbles," said a man who was quietly smoking near
the stove. He was about forty years of age; his person was strong and
manly, with slightly rounded shoulders; his full, dark eyes beamed
with gentleness; his clustering, deep brown hair fell low on his
broad forehead, and continued round his face in a beard that became
coal-black towards the chin. He looked kind and enduring rather than
impetuous, and not unaptly represented the image of strength in repose.

He wore a close-fitting grass-green coat over a scarlet waistcoat, on
which hung a rosary and crucifix between his green, embroidered braces;
black knee-breeches, scarlet stockings, and laced half-boots. The quiet
self-possession of his manner bespoke him the _wirth_, or master of the
inn.

"The thunder still rumbles," said he.

"Aye aye, Sandwirth," answered one of the peasants, grinning; "better
to be under cover than half-way between this and St. Martin's."

"Father," said a lad, running into the house, "two men are coming
hither. And I think," added he eagerly, under his breath, "the tallest
of them is Joseph Speckbacher."

"Hist!" said his father, laying aside his pipe, while he glanced
furtively at the stranger.

At the same time, the rustics, having finished their supper, departed,
without caring for the skirt of the storm, which they pronounced
clearing off, though large drops continued to fall heavily.

"Those labourers seem content with homely fare," said the traveller,
pushing aside his plate.

"They don't taste meat once a fortnight," said the Sandwirth, "and yet
you see what strong, active fellows they are. Shall you take a bed
here, sir, to-night?"

"No, I would sooner go on, if it were not for the storm."

"It will soon blow over," said the Wirth.

"Perhaps you have a book to lend me, meanwhile?"

"Oh, yes," said the girl Theresa, bringing him one with alacrity.

"This? Hum! the 'South German Plutarch,'" muttered the traveller--"I
doubt if I shall not drop asleep over it."

And, laying his legs up on a wooden stool, he began to turn over the
leaves.

Two men here came in, panting and laughing. "What a storm!" cried one,
laying his conical hat with its drenched feather on the table. "How are
you, Anderl?" extending his brown muscular hand to him.

"Well; praised be Jesus Christ!" said the Sandwirth, reverently; to
which the two others replied with seriousness--

"For ever and ever, Amen!"

It is the usual Tyrolese ejaculation, when a new comer enters the
house. There is something simple and solemn in it, when spoken
reverently, which it always is.

"How is your good Maria?" said the Sandwirth's wife, coming forward.
"And your little boy, Anderl's namesake?"

"Well, both of them, thanks to God; though Maria has now three
youngsters on her hands. But, Sandwirth, have you heard the news? The
Archduke--"

"Hist!" again said the Sandwirth softly, laying his hand on the other's
breast; and indicating by a wary glance of his eye, the presence of the
stranger. The other replied by a look. His companion, a younger man,
gave a gesture of impatience, and whispered, "Is he going to stay?"

"All in good time," said the Sandwirth cheerily. "We are just going to
sup, and you will join us. One thing at a time will last the longer."

"Aye, Anderl, that is always your word," said his wife,
good-humouredly, as she placed about four pounds of boiled bacon on the
table. "You never could bear to season eating with business."

"Have you a good horse to sell, just now, Sandwirth?" said the younger
and shorter of the newly arrived, by way of general conversation.

"How should I have a horse to sell?" returned the Wirth, dragging
a heavy wooden bench towards the table. "I know no more of selling
horses, Franz, than you do of selling brandy."

At which they all laughed, as a capital joke. The family and their two
friends then sat down to their homely meal.

"So you are going to give us a shooting-match on Sunday," said the
young man whom the Wirth had called Franz.

"Ye--s," said the Sandwirth reluctantly; "but I don't altogether like
it."

"You don't? And why not, Sandwirth?"

"I doubt it's being quite right."

"Why, it brings you plenty of custom!"

"Aye, Franz; and, in your eyes, that settles the question; but I doubt
if it be a good way of spending the Sabbath. If I were a maker of laws,
which I'm never likely to be, I'd put down Sabbath-breaking."

"But, Sandwirth," said the taller man, in a peculiarly full, rich,
earnest voice, "the Sandwirths, your ancestors, used to give Sabbath
shooting-matches on this very spot. Look at the glorious old targets
hanging like trophies on your wall. I remember, the first time I ever
came in sight of this house was on a Sunday afternoon, and the sharp,
quick, rattling reports of the rifles echoed among the hills. You
yourself stood umpire among a knot of young fellows in green jackets
and red sashes; and your grey-headed father sat at a long table covered
with hammers, screw-drivers, powder-flasks, ramrods, and everything
that could be wanted."

"He did so, Speckbacher. You bring the scene before me." And the
Wirth's deep-set, large dark eyes seemed dwelling on some far-off
picture.

"You yourself hit the bull's eye twice, Anderl!"

"I did so, Joseph. 'Twas the day that I told old Gasper, who called me
a beardless boy, that if he lived long enough, he should see my beard
reach my girdle; and he laughed and said, when that day came, he would
give me two oxen."

"So that's the reason you wear a beard!" cried Franz. "But, Sandwirth,
surely such a match as that we have been speaking of, was fine sport!
I call it play, not work; and therefore no breaking of the Sabbath."

The Sandwirth, however, would not retract.

"Play like that," said he, thoughtfully and impressively, as though he
weighed every word before he spoke it, "is often as fatiguing as work;
and it sometimes leads to quarrels, and to taking God's holy name in
vain. Anyhow, it is not _rest_; and God bade us _rest_, mind you, on
the Sabbath-day."

"Pleasure _is_ rest," said Franz.

"No, pleasure is often the hardest of work," said the Sandwirth.

"That's true, too," said Speckbacher, as if a sudden light streamed in
upon him.

"Well, I know, to lie on my back with nothing to do but twiddle my
thumbs, would to me be the hardest work of all," said Franz.

"I wonder," said Speckbacher, after a short pause, "if such are your
views, that you mean to have a Sunday shooting-match at all."

"I've a purpose," said the Wirth in a low voice; and then, in a louder
key, as he rose and went towards the door, "I am going forth to look at
the weather, sir," said he. "The storm has, I think, overblown; but if
not, and you like to pass the night here, my wife shall prepare you a
bed."

"By no means; if the weather is really clearing up," said the
traveller, "I shall yet push on; for it is not late."

"The clouds have rolled off, and the valley is sparkling in the last
sun-gleam," said the Wirth.

"Very well. How much to pay?"

"Fifty kreutzers," said the hostess.

"Can you change me this zwanziger?"

While the good woman was mustering change, the traveller rested his
chin on his knuckles, and attentively surveyed Speckbacher.

He was undeniably one of Nature's chieftains. His height was uncommon,
and his lofty carriage of the neck and head, when excited, worthy of
one of the old Greeks. But often that gallant head drooped, and a look
of deep depression shaded his countenance. There was something intrepid
in his mien; he was one from whom you would never expect to hear a lie,
or a sentiment that was base. His language was homely, but energetic;
his features were good, his hair and eyes coal-black. His age might be
thirty-five.

Franz was full ten years younger, and had tolerable features, but a
kind of rakish, good-for-nothing air that was rather repelling.

"Why won't you have anything to say to me?" he was asking Theresa. "You
seem to be knitting all your wits into that blue worsted stocking. If
Rudolf, now, were here, you'd brighten up directly."

"But as he isn't, there's no occasion for it," said Theresa,
carelessly, and continuing to knit with all her might.

"What a pleasant voice you have, Theresa! I wish you would sing us a
song."

"That's likely, isn't it?" said the girl.

"Come now, do."

"Thank you, I am going to take my little sisters to bed." And she moved
away from him. He looked after her with a mixture of admiration and
pique.

Just as the traveller, after some inquiries about the roads, was about
to depart, two more men hastily entered. The first was a Capuchin
friar, of stalwart make, with the hood of his brown woollen gown pulled
so forward that nothing could readily be made out of him but a thick,
flowing beard of the hue that partial mothers are apt to call auburn,
though others often pronounce it red.

"The peace of God rest on this house, through Jesus Christ our Lord!"
said he.

"For ever and ever!" meekly responded the rest.

The Capuchin's companion was a light, active young mountaineer of
three-and-twenty, brown as a nut, and well becoming the picturesque
national costume. As soon as Theresa, who was just leaving the kitchen,
saw him, she reddened very much, and hastily withdrew.

"How the Passeyr is swollen already!" said the Capuchin.

"Is the water out?" cried the traveller, suddenly. "Then I don't know
that I've any mind to go on."

"Pooh, pooh!" said the Sandwirth, rather impatiently, "the river
cannot have overflowed its banks. You see it has not hindered these
foot-travellers. However, sir," changing his tone to one more
conciliatory, "if you will oblige us with your company, you shall have
as good and clean a bed as any in the Tyrol, though I cannot promise
you a flounced pillow and satin damask coverlet, such as you might get
at Botzen."

"No, no, I'll take my chance," said the man of indecision. "Is there
any one here that will see me through the valley?"

"You cannot well miss your road, sir; but my boy Johann shall start you
on it, if you will."

"Thank you; I will give him a few kreutzers."

"No need, sir, thank you."

And the Sandwirth saw him out, and gave him some encouragement about
the weather, and watched him off; and then returned laughing. The
others laughed too.

"Gone at last!" exclaimed Franz. "I thought he never would make up his
mind."

"Now for business," said Speckbacher, looking eager.

"I have hardly spoken to Father Joachim yet," said the Sandwirth,
approaching the Capuchin, and kneeling. "Your blessing, father!"

The Capuchin, before blessing him, threw back his hood, thereby
revealing a frank, determined, intelligent countenance. He was by no
means an old man; probably a few years younger, even, than Speckbacher,
and apparently his equal in strength.

"Anna, is there still any supper left?" said the Sandwirth, rather
apprehensively.

"Certainly," replied his wife; "I hope Father Joachim will never find
our larder quite empty. Johann caught a trout weighing three pounds,
this morning."

"Draw in, Rudolf," said the Sandwirth cheerfully to the young
mountaineer; "and don't sit at that awful distance, my lad, as if you
were not one of us."

Rudolf bashfully obeyed. At the same time, Theresa, who had tucked
up her little sisters with considerable expedition, re-entered, and
began sedulously to assist her mother in preparing Father Joachim's
supper. She had not been absent many minutes, yet had contrived to slip
on clean white full sleeves under her trim violet velvet bodice--a
circumstance which did not escape the vigilant eye of Franz.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER II.

THE INN KITCHEN.


"Who was that stranger, Anderl?" said Father Joachim.

"A flat-faced Bavarian, I think, father," said the Sandwirth: "cunning
as a fox! He took note of every word we said."

"You said nothing incautious, then, I hope?"

"Nothing whatever, father; we talked of shooting-matches and
Sabbath-breaking."

"Good. Now then--here is a bag of money."

"For what, father?"

"For laying in stores of various sorts; which you, as an innkeeper, may
do without suspicion. You may, perhaps, even contrive to conceal some
ammunition."

"Doubtless, father; though this is not a particularly good
hiding-place."

"You will be at some expense too about your shooting-matches."

"You think them quite justifiable, father?"

"Quite, my son. I think, in this instance, the end will justify the
means. This will be a holy war; and the meetings, ostensibly for sport,
will cover our arrangements. None among us are traitors, but some may
be indiscreet, and these must not be trusted, but quietly sent away to
the mountain châlets. This will be mortifying, but they will still be
of service, for some must keep our flocks and herds, or how can the
others be spared to fight? There must be one common purpose among us,
without heart-burnings or jealousies."

"There must. There shall."

"It is easy to say there must,--there shall,--but are you yourself,
Hofer, willing to co-operate with Martin Teimer, or perhaps even
occasionally to be subordinate to him? There has been some coldness, I
think, between you?"

"On my side, none," said the Sandwirth, after a little hesitation; "I
bear him no ill will, nor do I know why he should bear any to me. The
man's an able man; more so than I; and has already been raised from a
private to a major in the militia, though, just now, he only keeps a
tobacco-shop, which is no better, I take it, than keeping a wirth-haus.
That's neither here nor there. I'll co-operate with him, or serve under
him, whenever it needs."

"This is the spirit that must reign among us all," said Father Joachim.
"We must exemplify the Scripture rule, 'Let each esteem other better
than himself.' 'Him that is greatest among you, let him be your
servant;' if by being so, he can be of the most good. Do you go with
me, my children? Can you submit to this? Will you be content?"

"We will!" was simultaneously responded. The two young men spoke
lowest: Rudolf, from the modesty natural to him; Franz, because he
thought the requirement rather hard.

"Then listen to me. Prepare for action. In a few days we shall rise."

"Hurrah! hurrah!"

And short, loud, abrupt shouts burst from the men's lips. The next
instant, their glowing eyes were fixed on the Capuchin in profound
silence.

"Yes, my children,--here is the proclamation," continued Father
Joachim, drawing a paper from his bosom; "hear it--

"'To arms, Tyroleans! To arms! The hour of deliverance is at hand. Your
beloved emperor, Francis, calls on you to arm in a most holy cause,
which, after a long and treacherous peace, stands forth like a rock in
the deluge, the last remaining defence of the liberties of Europe!

"'You must now either rise while Napoleon is busy in another part of
Europe, attempting to load the Spaniards with a foreign yoke, or wait
till he has accomplished that project, and returns to crush Austria,
the only remaining obstacle to his aim at universal power.

"'Your choice is made! Then look up to us! Everything is already in
motion. You will again see at your head your beloved Archduke John, to
whom every inch of the Tyrol is known and endeared, and whose greatest
pain is ever to be separated from you.

"'It is impossible that a separation between Austria and Tyrol, like
that of 1805, can again take place--a separation so bitterly felt!
Bavaria declared that the Tyrolese should not only retain their ancient
rights and freedom, but that their welfare should be promoted in every
possible manner, and "that no iota of their constitution should be
changed."

"'How your honest hearts rejoiced at this royal promise! But how has
it been kept? You have seen your abbeys and monasteries destroyed,
your church property confiscated, your churches profaned, your bishops
and priests banished. Your knights and nobles have been stripped of
their old, hereditary honours; your cities and courts of justice, your
industrious citizens and tradespeople, have alike had their interests
sacrificed; heavy taxes have been imposed, and no mercy has been shown
towards those who could not pay them.

"'Tyroleans! when you recollect all this,--when you consider the
treacherous conduct of the Bavarians, and remember that you have never
taken the oath of allegiance to them,--you will have but one thought,
one purpose; and your lips will alone utter the word Deliverance!'"

"God save the emperor!" ejaculated the Sandwirth.

"And bless our cause!" added Speckbacher, deeply moved.

"It will be comparatively easy," said Father Joachim, "for Bavaria to
penetrate our country as far as Innsbruck; but, from that point, our
enemies will find themselves in a complete network of defiles, ravines,
gorges, and valleys--"

"From which, if we let them escape, we shall be fools!" cried
Speckbacher.

"They are many, and we are few, my son."

"They fight for kreutzers, and we for freedom, father."

"True; and therefore I believe we shall win the day, but it will be a
hard-fought one. From Carinthia the foe will approach us through the
valley of the Drave; from Italy through the valley of the Adige. We
must hem them in, and cut them off, before they effect a junction. No
time must be lost in fortifying the mountain passes. On the 9th of
April, a division of Austrian troops will advance--"

"God be thanked! Under the Archduke John?"

"Under General Chastelar and Baron Hormayr. You look disappointed,
Hofer; but they are good men and true.--Directly they begin to march,
the Tyrol must rise. You must ring your alarm-bells and kindle your
beacons; send messages to every dwelling within reach, and billets
inscribed '_'Tis time_' to those afar off. Saw-dust scattered on the
rivers will be a signal to the men lower down the valleys that you are
in arms. The foe will probably endeavour to reach the Brenner by way of
Brixen--"

"He must be intercepted!"

"Undoubtedly. Who will lead the men of the Passeyrthal over the
Jauffen? Andreas Hofer, will _you_?"

A deep red flush rose to the Sandwirth's temples. He rose; and, in a
low, firm voice, replied--

"I will."

"Let us make some memoranda, then, of men and places--"

Some humble writing implements were placed on the table; and Hofer,
after trying the point of a stumpy pen on his thumb, offered it, with a
crumpled piece of paper, to Father Joachim, who, however, produced his
own pocket-book, while the Sandwirth and Speckbacher reckoned up to him
the number of men they thought they might muster. Rudolf presently went
round to Theresa, and whispered, "Can you give me some bits of wood? I
might be cutting some billets and inscribing them."

She mutely nodded, went out, and returned with her apron full. He took
out his clasp-knife and quietly set to work; and Franz, after a lazy
fashion, helped him.

"Five thousand strong," at length said the Capuchin.

"There or thereabouts," said Hofer. "Speckbacher must count up the men
about Halle."

His little boy here stole up to him.

"So, Johann," said his father, in a lowered voice, while Speckbacher
reckoned up the men of Halle, "you set the stranger on his way. Did he
say anything to you?"

"Only asked a heap of questions about the shooting match, father."

"Humph! Nothing else?"

"Only about Speckbacher--"

"What of me?" hastily said Speckbacher, overhearing him.

"Only who you were. I said you took wood to the salt-works."

"Humph! Was that all?"

"He asked me about Franz."

"What did you tell him?" said Franz.

"Oh, nothing--I only said you sold horses; and sometimes brandy."

"You might have let that alone, youngster," muttered Franz, looking a
little annoyed; while the others laughed.

"What said you of me, my little man?" inquired Father Joachim, without
pausing from his writing.

"What _could_ I say, father, but that you were Father Joachim, of
the Capuchin convent at Brixen, and that we all loved your reverence
dearly?" said Johann.

"You told him my name, then," muttered Father Joachim.

"Did you say anything of Rudolf, Johann?" said Theresa softly, with a
little pull at her brother's hair.

"I said he was a goodish sort of a fellow," said Johann doggedly; "and
that I believed he came here to look after _you_."

"I'll pay you for it!" whispered she indignantly; and giving him a
little push, she hastily went out; Rudolf furtively looking after her.

"My little lad," said the Capuchin gently, "you must learn more
discretion, or you will be a child all your life. Well, Hofer, I think
these will be enough?"

"Enough and to spare," said the Sandwirth; "with God's blessing."

"Children, let us ask it."

Every knee was bent in prayer, while Father Joachim fervently
invoked the aid of the God of battles. This concluded the conference.
Solemnized, and with burning hearts, they retired to rest; while the
Bavarian traveller carried the very little he knew to the best market
for it.

A lovely April morning succeeded this eventful night. Scarcely had the
sun begun to gild the mountain-tops, when Theresa stood beside the
river with her milk-pail on her head, inquiring of Rudolf, who was
fishing in the shade, how many trout he had caught for Father Joachim's
breakfast.

Carrying a pail or pitcher on the head gives the neck an erect, noble
carriage--reining it up, as it were: and Theresa, in her short, scanty
grass-green petticoat, and black bodice laced with scarlet, might have
stood for the Princess Nausicaa, as her laughing black eyes looked down
on the young fisherman from beneath their long lashes.

"There's a wary fellow under that yellow stone," answered Rudolf; "I
caught a gleam, just now, of his bright back-fin."

"I don't believe you did--I dare say it was only the water that
sparkled. I would undertake to milk all the cows in the Passeyrthal,
before you caught fish enough for dinner."

"Try me," said he, leaning back on his elbow to look up full at her.
"Though I have but a four-acre farm, it's in full cultivation, quite
productive enough for you and me, with a good wooden cottage on it,
too. I'll catch you a fish for dinner every day."

"What nonsense, Rudolf, you do talk!"

"No nonsense at all. I'm quite in earnest; but you do love to cut up a
poor fellow."

"No, I don't," said Theresa, looking down, though she could not bend
her head. "Shall you come to the shooting-match on Sunday?"

"To be sure I shall. The match will be only a feint."

"Do you like the prospect of war?"

"Certainly--Don't you?"

"If my father does not get hurt, nor--nor one or two friends--"

"Martin Teimer, I suppose."

"What care I for Martin Teimer?"

"Franz Raffel, then!"

"Rudolf, how _can_ you be so stupid?"

"Speckbacher--"

"Certainly, for one. We all love dear Speckbacher."

"Theresa! What wild tales they tell of him! They say that, being early
left his own master, it soon ceased to be sufficient excitement to
him to follow the roe or wage war with the lammergeyer from morning
to-night, in the most savage, inaccessible places, so that he at length
left his home altogether, and joined a set of lawless companions who
dwelt among the caverns; supporting himself with his rifle when it
was successful, but at other times joining predatory parties into the
Bavarian dominions."

"Something I have heard of this," said Theresa, in a low voice; "but
Maria Schmeider reclaimed him--"

"No, he was checked by the sudden and terrible end of one of his
companions--"

"At any rate, he has been one of the best of husbands, and most honest
of men, ever since he married; and their little cottage at Rinn is the
scene of perfect happiness--"

"There is a touch of romance in him, still, however. Franz told me just
now, as we returned from mass, that on their road yesterday, through
thunder and lightning, Speckbacher gave him such wonderful descriptions
of the salt caverns near Halle, that it seemed like a fairy tale."

"Very likely," said Theresa. "I have heard him speak of them to my
father, and say how he should delight to take him through them. My
father liked the idea, but I confess it would make me shudder. All
sunlight is excluded; you begin by plunging down three hundred steps
that seem as though conducting you to the very centre of the earth;
the red light of your torch falls on murky subterranean lakes, beneath
towering walls of sparkling salt. How horrible, should one fall
into one of those lakes! Speckbacher says there are no fewer than
forty-eight caverns, and that some of the galleries connecting them
are three leagues in length. He called it a capital place for hide and
seek."

"Aye, or for storing brandy, as that scamp Franz said," muttered Rudolf.

"Much obliged," said Franz, sauntering up. "Hope I'm no interruption."

"None at all," said Rudolf, watching his trout.

"Listeners never hear good of themselves," said Theresa tartly.

"I didn't know you were talking secrets, or I wouldn't have intruded,"
said Franz, throwing himself on the grass. "So I'm a scamp, am I?"

"Well, I'm sorry I used the word, and that's truth," said the
good-natured Rudolf.

"I suppose you think it, though," said Franz, jerking a stone into the
river.

"Oh, don't trouble the water!" cried Theresa, hastily. "How can you be
such a spoil-sport?"

"Spoil-sport, am I?" said Franz doggedly. "Well, perhaps I am. Now I
know my titles and designations. Franz Scamp Spoil-sport."

"Better take care not to deserve them, then," said Theresa pettishly.
"If you stay out here much longer, we shall breakfast without you."

And pitching her voice, which was both sweet and clear, rather high,
she went towards the house, singing one of the popular national airs
in praise of liberty.

Franz followed the songstress into the house; and Rudolf, who, having
exchanged his worm for a smaller one, (for trout loathe large baits,)
was just going to try his luck again when little Johann, running up to
him, and looking on for a minute with very round eyes, exclaimed--

"Why, you mustn't do that!--Why, that's father's pet trout, that feeds
out of his hand and weighs fifteen pounds! Why, that trout has lived
under that stone twenty-eight years! Father'll be finely angry with
you, I can tell you, if you think of eating that trout! Why, he'd as
soon eat me!"

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER III.

THE SHOOTING MATCH.


Sunday afternoon presented a busy scene at the _wirth-haus_. Groups
of gaily-dressed peasants were standing about, many talking fast and
eagerly, others quietly, and a little apart. Here stood a woman in an
extinguisher-shaped black worsted cap, with her massive arms akimbo,
talking to another apparently strong enough to build a house, who
wore a globular cap of fur; while, between them, stood a third in
a grass-green gown, very short-waisted, and with three rows of red
binding round the skirt, her head covered by a gaudy handkerchief, tied
under the chin. They looked worthy compatriots of the women of the
Vorarlberg, who, during the Thirty Years' War, drove a Swedish division
out of the Lechthal, and killed them to a man. There was more of the
lioness that might be roused to defend her cubs, in them, however, than
of the _poissarde_; they had hard hands, strong arms, kind hearts, and
firm wills.

The young girls, who were mostly sunburnt, and pleasant-looking
rather than pretty, had bestowed considerable attention on their
hair, which was braided in long shining tails, tied with gay ribands,
and surmounted in some cases by jaunty little straw hats, rather
bigger than daisies, and wreathed with primroses, blue hyacinths, and
anemones. Among the young men and lads, red sashes, green jackets, and
blue stockings were rife; each had his tall, conical hat with gold cord
and tassels, flower, or feather; his rifle, plated buckles, and flower
in his button-hole. They did not seem to have much to say to the young
girls, for flirtation is very little countenanced in the Tyrol.

The target was set up at a distance of two hundred and fifty paces.
There were the benches, the beer-tables, and the long board on
tressels, covered with balls, powder-flasks, and everything likely
to be wanted for the sport. The rifles that were to do such goodly
service were heavy and clumsy, with triggers so delicate as almost to
be set off by a gust of wind. Theresa actively assisted her mother in
waiting on the company. Johann sidled up to little Anderl Speckbacher
and got him off to a bank, where they could watch the shooting, their
arms round each other's necks. The two little girls held their mother's
apron as long as they could, and finally found themselves some juvenile
companions.

Franz was very smart; but, somehow, his clothes always looked as if
they had been made for somebody else; and were worn with a slouching
air, as if he felt too fine for his company. On the other hand,
Rudolf's glossy suit of green velveteen fitted without a crease, and
he did not seem to think either of himself or his dress, but to have
alert, disengaged attention for whatever was going on.

Talking to Hofer and Speckbacher was a man of thirty, with piercing
blue eyes, a bold but not prepossessing countenance, indicative of
great sharpness, and stooping a little, neither like a mountaineer nor
a soldier, though he had been a militia captain and major. This was
Martin Teimer, who had come from Clagenfurt to talk over the rising
with his compatriots. He had been appointed by General Chastelar, chief
of the peasants of the Upper Innthal, and seemed rather inclined, his
two companions thought, to plume himself on it. These three men had
an eye to everything that was going on around them; and now and then
separated and mingled among the groups, speaking to men here and there,
till, in time, they had had a short private colloquy with every man on
the ground; returning to each other from time to time, and comparing
notes.

Meanwhile, the rifles were in full action: now circle one, now circle
two was hit, now the bull's eye; and even without looking round, it
was easy to tell by the cheerful, the triumphant, or the moderated
acclamations, what had been the rifleman's success.

Speckbacher, returning from one of these progresses, observed to
Hofer, "I don't much like that youth, Franz Raffel; he is shallow,
vain-glorious, and given to talk. He would be better among the châlets."

"Thither he shall go, if we can get him," said Hofer; "but he is
somewhat slippery to get hold of; half his time, he is skulking about,
smuggling brandy across the frontier; and as we want a good store of it
just now, I at present make him useful."

"Rudolf is worth a score of him," said Speckbacher; "and I think your
pretty Theresa thinks so too. I would not discourage that youngster,
Anderl, even if Martin Teimer were to come forward--"

"Of a surety, no," said Hofer, quietly. "The lad is a good lad. We
shall see what stuff he is made of this summer; and, if he quits
himself well, he shall have Theresa at the end of it. You and I were
little more than two-and-twenty when we took our brides to church; and
Theresa is already nearly as old as her mother was. But we have other
matters in hand just now. I see one or two together whom I want to
speak to, only Franz is within earshot of them. Do you draw him off."

Speckbacher immediately went up to him, and asked whether he could let
him have some brandy; and Hofer joined a couple of elderly men, who
were just sitting down side by side on a bench under a tree.

"There hasn't been such a match as this a good while," one was saying;
"but, dear me, what matches we used to have when I was a lad! I'm not
more than fifteen or twenty years older than that marksman who is
taking aim now, but I don't believe he'll hit the white. Crack! Well,
they're making a piece of work about it--I suppose he's hit the bull's
eye."

"Here comes one that can do more than that," said the other. "Anderl!
you have not shot, to-day."

"Boys' play," said Hofer with indifference.

"But you could show them what a man can do."

"Brag, neighbours? No good of brag. Besides, these lads shoot well,
many of them. There was some good shooting before you came."

"People always say that of everything," said the other. "I've no spirit
for these things now."

"Ah, things will befall shortly, that will put you in spirits."

"What mean you, Sandwirth? Is anything going to happen?"

Hofer nodded.

The two men put their heads close to his, and looked eager.

"We shall rise, soon."

"_Rise?_ What, the Tyrol?"

Another nod.

"Under whom?"

"Nobody in particular. All of us under God."

They lifted up their hands and eyes.

"But is it certain? How do you know?"

"Of some one that knows. Quite certain."

"_Himmel!_--Did you get us together to-day to tell us this?"

"Yes."

"'Tis time!" cried one of the men in an impassioned under-tone. "Why
should we be turned over from one master to another like a flock of
sheep? How did the King of Bavaria guarantee our ancient rights and
usages? With a piece of sheepskin. None of his promises have been
kept: our representative States have been suppressed, our public funds
seized, our Church property confiscated; and, as though this were not
enough, taxes have been imposed upon us. The Emperor is afraid of
France; but are _we_?"

"Not one of us, as we shall presently show them," said Hofer.
"Buonaparte is already in the field against our Emperor, but we
shall be quickly down upon him. Communications have been opened with
the Archduke John, who is immediately going to effect a powerful
diversion. Troops are about to march to our assistance."

"Why, neighbour, if you were to speak this out, every Tyrolese would
rise directly!"

"True; but the moment, though close at hand, is not quite come. In a
day or two, perhaps, you will receive a little billet inscribed '_'Tis
time_'--the whole country will be up directly!"

"Come, I'll try _my_ hand at the rifle this moment!" cried the old man,
throwing aside his stick, and hastening towards the crowd. He was known
and respected--they made way for him.

"Old Spickbart is going to try a shot!" cried Franz to Rudolf--"What
sport! I'll bet you a quart of brandy he don't hit the target at all!"

The good man's hand shook so that his ball only hit the outer circle.

"I'll try again," said he.

"Yes, do," said the Sandwirth kindly; and looking round him as he
spoke. There was not a smile, except on the face of Franz.

"You and I used often to shoot together," said Hofer. "Now then. Don't
be in a hurry."

This time Spickbart hit the bull's eye. He was much applauded, and
looked greatly elated.

"Ah, I thought I could!" said he, wagging his head. "The fault was only
in my hand; not in my eye.--Now, you, Hofer."

"No, no," said Hofer.

"Oh yes, Sandwirth! Please, Sandwirth!" cried many voices.

"You silly boys," said he, looking about for his own rifle; "what do
you want me to play with you for?"

A feather from some hat lay at his feet. He picked it up and gave it to
Rudolf.

"There, go and hold it up fifty paces beyond the target."

"Rather you than me," said Franz with a shrug, as Rudolf walked off.

"I'm not a bit afraid," said Rudolf.

He had no need to be. Crack went the rifle; puff went the feather.
There it lay, in two little fragments; Rudolf's finger and thumb unhurt.

"Well--that was the coolest thing!" ejaculated Franz, as the hills rang
with acclamations.

"Yes, he's cool enough, that lad; without any brag," said Hofer,
quietly putting down his piece.

"Franz was not thinking of _him_," said Speckbacher, grasping his
friend's hand.

"I _was_," said Hofer softly. "I've tested the boy."

Speckbacher gave him a quick look.

"He stood fire well."

"Yes, and expects no notice taken of it. Did it never occur to you that
William Tell's little son was as brave as William Tell?"

"Never till this minute! Do you hear that, Anderl?"

Speckbacher's little son pressed his hand, and then stroked it, looking
up in his father's face.

"I should not have minded having the apple set on my head for _you_ to
shoot at, father."

"Would not you, my little boy?" And Speckbacher's brown hand fondly
stroked the boy's brown curls.

The sun was now nearly set. Hofer, as the best shot, was carried round
the ground, with flags, songs, and garlands; and another target added
as a trophy to those on his already honoured walls. He and Speckbacher
had pretty well ascertained whom they could depend on; a few more
earnest words spoken, and they were all on their way to their homes.

Hofer re-entered the house, with his hand on Rudolf's shoulder.

"Here's a young fellow, now," said he cheerfully to his wife, "who had
faith that I would not blow his right hand to pieces, and disable him
for life, just out of brag."

"Of course you would not, Sandwirth," said Rudolf. "What good would it
have done you?"

"Ah, my boy, I might have attempted something I could not achieve!"

"You? No! you'll never do that."

"Well, I hope not. How well everything has gone off to-day! I am so
glad Spickbart hit the bull's eye."

"I am so glad you hit the feather," said his wife.

"Oh, there was nothing in that. Poor Spickbart is getting in years, and
a little shaky; but there's a man's true spirit in him yet."

"What a bustle and noise there has been; I'm glad it's over."

"So am I, Anna. But it has been a very important meeting."

"A few of the girls wanted to get up a dance; but I knew that would
never do."

"You were quite right. Let us dance when the day is won, not before."

"Art weary, man?"

"A little, dear. Open a fresh bottle of beer."

She did, and sat down close opposite to him, looking at him
affectionately with her large brown eyes.

Rudolf and Theresa were talking in low, lover-like tones, at the door,
under covert of the balustraded gallery. The young ones were at play.

Franz presently lounged in.

"I'm going now, Sandwirth," said he, approaching Hofer, whose hand was
locked in his wife's. "Any commands?"

"Only about the brandy."

"Oh, yes, we talked that over before. You shall have it."

"What impression has this day made on you, Franz?"

"Well--it's been very hot, for the time of year."

"I was not thinking of the weather. Have you had a pleasant afternoon's
sport?"

"Well, no--there was too much business mixed up with it. Sport is one
thing, and business another. Besides, I only hit the bull's eye twice,
and Rudolf hit it five times; whereas, the last time, you know--"

"Yes, I remember."

"So that, altogether, you see--No, it was a poor match, I call it.
Sport's sport, and business is business; isn't it, Sandwirth?"

"I can't gainsay that. Well, Franz, I'm afraid you don't look forward
with much pleasure to a busy campaign this summer."

"I hope to do my duty as well as other people," said Franz, looking
down. "What must be done, must. Of course, we shall none of us like it."

"Do you call that speaking like a bold, hearty young man? Why, you
ought to rouse up at the sound of the war trump!"

"Oh, yes, of course; so I do."--yawning.

"Thou'rt sleepy, lad," said Anna, rather contemptuously.

"No, I'm quite awake," said Franz.

"Now," said the Sandwirth, "there will be plenty of different kinds of
work to do this summer; so that all people's tastes may be suited.
There will be plenty of fighting; those who are active and stirring,
and fond of their country, will like that. There will be plenty of
message-carrying from one post to another; this will be attended with
occasional risk, and will require much activity and dexterity, and will
be equally honourable and useful with the other. There will be plenty
of hard labour, felling trees, rolling stones, making barricades,
carrying ammunition up precipitous heights; this will be as useful as
the others: plenty of night-watching; this will be fatiguing rather
than dangerous, and as useful as the others. Then, while so many are
away from their herds and their flocks, some will be absolutely needed
to look after the stock; and these will be as useful as the others.
Which of all these various posts will best suit your fancy?"

"Well, that requires consideration," said Franz, pulling a wooden stool
to the table, and sitting down opposite to Hofer. "Let me see. First,
there's fighting. You know, Sandwirth, that I've dealt so long in
foreign brandy, that I know a little what danger is--"

"Of course; and therefore--"

"And therefore, if I don't choose fighting, people can't say I'm
afraid. Can they, now?"

"Whether they can or no, is little to the purpose."

"Just so. Well, then; as to the message-carrying; that, as you say, is
useful, but dangerous; to which I may add vexatious."

"I don't know why it need be."

"Don't you? Why, I look upon it as one of the most plaguy,
uninteresting, abasing employments a fellow can undertake; and without
getting any credit by it."

"Let it pass, then. There are plenty whom it will suit very well."

"Oh yes! Well, then, let me see. What comes next? Oh, manual labour.
Felling trees, and so forth. Do you know, Sandwirth, my mother asked
me, last Christmas, to chop up a billet of wood for the fire, and I hit
myself such a blow on the left hand with the axe,--here, just at the
fleshy part of the thumb,--that I carry the mark of it, as you may see,
to this day. And my mother said it _might_ have brought on lock-jaw!"

"Did she, though?"

"Death in three days," said Franz solemnly. "These handicraft jobs,
you see, require practice. They amount almost to trades. Now, a trade
requires an apprenticeship; and I've never had one to a woodcutter: so
that, altogether, I might do myself more hurt than anybody else."

"Many people do."

"That's considered then. Well, what comes next? Night-watching. Oh,
yes, I would not at all mind taking my turn at that, though I'm a
dreadful one for falling asleep."

"A sleepy sentinel would not be of much use."

"No; only everybody must sleep sometimes; and they that work hardest
sleep soundest."

"Just so."

"As for carrying provisions up the hills, little chaps like your Johann
are equal to that, I think."

"I should hope so."

"--Which they are not with regard to looking after stock. That's a
man's business. As you said, it's just as useful and honourable as the
others--"

"I said useful, though not honourable,--"

"No, you didn't _say_ it, you know--I knew what you meant. And it isn't
every one that understands stock, or would be for taking the trouble of
it."

"No, indeed! You're quite right there."

"So that, as I _do_ understand it, and don't mind the trouble of
it,--why, to oblige _you_, I'll undertake it."

"Thank you heartily, Franz! You will indeed oblige me very much!"

"Come, that's cordial!" said Franz, as Hofer held out his hand to him.
"I'm quite glad I've decided as I have."

"So am I. I hoped you would get round to it, but did not know how to
propose it."

"Oh, I'll do it; and do it well. Bless you! you mightn't have had a
head of cattle left!"

"And then where should we be?"

"There's no knowing," said Franz, with a sapient shake of the head.
"Well, good night."

The voices at the door had been perfectly silent during this dialogue;
and Hofer had once or twice heard a stifled laugh.

Franz, however, pre-occupied, and quite self-satisfied with what he
considered a masterly piece of tactics, walked off.

"What a deal of trouble that young fellow has saved me, to be sure!"
muttered Hofer. Then, raising his voice, "Now, then, dear children,
come in and sing the vesper hymn."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.

WOLFSTHRUN.


Perched on a certain height not far from Sterzing, stands a certain old
castle, one of the many that crest the Tyrolese mountains, and which,
on investigation, too often disappoint the traveller by proving either
desolate ruins, or garrisoned to overflowing by Austrian soldiers. But
the castle in question was both habitable and inhabited; a good and
even luxurious breakfast was spread in the lofty hall, which combined
the adjuncts of modern civilization with the romantic architecture of
feudal times; and a fine-looking military man, perhaps turned fifty,
sat reading despatches, while his daughter, a young lady of eighteen,
poured out coffee for him and a young cavalry officer, who was already
attacking the potted game.

"This seems an admirable proclamation of the Archduke's," said the
Baron, at length throwing aside his papers and beginning his breakfast.
"You will soon have plenty to do, Gerhardi."

"I hope we may," said Colonel Gerhardi. "Our just and numerous
complaints will lie before the tribunal of the world. The Archduke
calls it a holy war, and so do I. So great a power as Napoleon
Buonaparte's cannot be opposed alone, and therefore all the nations
ought to make common cause against him."

"Ought and will are two things," said Baron Sternach drily. "I should
embark in this war with much more readiness than I do, if I saw our way
safely and victoriously out of it; but if, after a fruitless though
brilliant struggle, we are reduced to make inglorious conditions of
peace, it would have been better to leave the matter alone."

"Ah, papa, don't throw cold water on us!" cried Hildegarde. "Why should
not we be the liberators of Europe? As soon as the rising once takes
place, I know you will take part in it as warmly as any."

"Certainly; for the danger of the brave is always less than that of the
coward; even if duty and discipline have no influence. My only fear is
lest we rush hastily into an unconsidered struggle with a foe whose
power, hitherto, nothing has been able to withstand."

"The tables will turn on him, some day, sir, you'll see," said Colonel
Gerhardi.

"I hope I may see it. All we have to do, just now, is to obey our
superior in command; and he gives the word to advance. Did you ever
chance to see Hofer?"

"Yes, Baron; I have seen him twice. He was one of the peasant deputies
to the States once, I think? A plain, homely, honest-hearted fellow,
seemingly. We didn't think much of him."

"Not as much, perhaps, as he deserved. I saw him in the year 1805,
when he was chosen from his native valley as deputy to the Archduke
John; which showed that the Tyrolese already looked upon him with
considerable confidence, though he could not have been much turned of
thirty. And he was summoned again by the Archduke, you know, to Vienna,
this January, which shows that he saw some ground of reliance in him."

"As a matter-of-fact witness, I should suppose, Baron. He would tell
the Archduke exactly what was the state of popular feeling, and how
many fighting men could be depended on, without the least hesitation
or exaggeration. I conclude him to be a man of strict truth; who would
neither speak disparagingly of a rival, nor praise him insincerely to
curry favour. This struck me with regard to what he said of Martin
Teimer. Hormayr put it to him closely: was Teimer a reliable man, or
was he not? Hofer spoke very briefly of him; he would not dispraise
him, even by an inuendo: neither would he say more in his praise than
he felt. Baron Hormayr noticed this to us afterwards, as if Hofer were
jealous of him; but I did not think him so. I thought he spoke the
simple truth."

"And few there be that speak it," said the Baron. "Well, we shall soon
see what is in them both. Hormayr is a sensible, gentlemanlike man, and
good officer."

"A little wanting in ardour, don't you think, Baron?"

"Pooh, pooh, you young fellows have too much. You think to carry things
by a _coup-de-main_."

"That's what Buonaparte did, sir, many times in Italy. We were
continually too slow for him."

"Well, well, we shall not be, now. We begin to-morrow; and that is near
enough at hand even for _you_, I should think."

"You are not afraid of leaving my cousin here, Baron?"

"Why should I be? Women and children will be respected. I mean her and
her aunt to be very useful to us; for I expect that this empty old
castle will be filled with wounded men, and Hildegarde must tend them
like the heroines of old song."

"Ah, that I gladly will," cried Hildegarde. "As soon as you and
Adolph ride off, I shall summon the servants, tell them what is to
be expected, and superintend their immediate preparations for the
reception of the sick."

"The strong-rooms and dungeons must be looked to also," said the Baron;
"for we may expect many prisoners."

"Ah, papa! don't put any of them down into those dark holes full of
newts and toads, only fit for the barbarous times!"

"Certainly not; but we must provide for their security, nevertheless,
or they may seize the castle and put _you_ into one of the dark holes,
instead."

"Ugh!--I am sure I should not live through the night! My hair would
turn quite white. Why, Adolph, you have no idea what terrible stories
are told of those dungeons--"

"Old wives' tales--"

"_True_ tales. Bones have been found. Human hair sticking to the wall.
Stains of blood!--"

"Well, well, we are not going to repeat those things. You may pet your
prisoners as much as you like, so long as you do not let them run away,
nor run away with them."

"With _one_ of them, papa, I suppose you meant to say. Well, I accept
your _carte-blanche_; but you must leave me the cellar-key."

"To treat the captive knight like the fair, Saracen?"

"Sick men require wine, papa. And I must have beef and mutton, and
bread and beer, in unlimited quantities, for those who are well."

"Nay, Hildegarde, as my fortune is not unlimited, I see it will be
to my interest to effect a very speedy exchange of prisoners--if the
enemy have the good luck to make any. But here are we reckoning on the
captured and wounded before the battle is fought!"

And, hastily despatching his breakfast, the Baron collected his papers
together, and went away to give various orders.

"I hope the campaign will be a short and a brilliant one," said
Hildegarde anxiously. "I shall so long for papa to return."

"My mother will soon join you," said Adolph. "But if you are in the
least fear--"

"Oh no! All my fears are for him; I have none for myself. There is
nothing I shall more gladly do than help to nurse the poor men who
have been wounded in fighting for our liberties. Terrible gashes and
amputations, indeed, I do not feel quite equal to. If we could get a
medical man to remain in the castle,--"

"Why should not you? Some of the Capuchins are very clever. Father
Joachim Haspinger has been an army chaplain, and is preparing for
service again. He is as good, I am told, at setting a limb as at
breaking a head. His reputation and influence among the peasantry are
immense. What a pleasant day that was, Hildegarde, when we visited the
Capuchin convent at Brixen!"

"Yes; and, do you know, we had another very pleasant excursion in the
Passeyrthal after you had rejoined your regiment. A storm came on, and
we took refuge in Hofer's Inn, _am Sand_. We did not see him; but his
wife and pretty daughter were very attentive to us.--Ah! the horses
are coming round," said Hildegarde, interrupting herself; and her eyes
filled with tears as her father returned to take leave of her; but she
brushed them away, and kissed him with a smile. She accompanied them to
the gate.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER V.

"'TIS TIME."


Ding-dong, ding-dong! Clang!--go the little and great church bells.
Bang! go the cannon; crack, crack! the rifles. The Tyrol is up!

The night of the eighth of April was dark and gloomy. General Chastelar
and Baron Hormayr passed it in riding through the Austrian troops to
give the necessary orders for the intended movement, and to see that
everything was in a state of preparation. The stillness which reigned
around was only broken by the measured tramp of many feet, the hollow
rattle of artillery, the lumbering of ammunition-wagons, and now and
then a clear-toned voice issuing a brief order.

Hofer and Martin Teimer, during this wakeful night, were busy in the
Sandwirth's kitchen, drawing up a general order to this effect:--

"On the 11th of April General Chastelar will arrive at Innsbruck, and
General Hiler at Brixen.

"The Archduke John directs the men of Pusterthal to occupy the pass
of Mulbach, and the Rittnern that of the Kuntersweg, that we may be
possessed of the strongest position before the Bavarians are alarmed,
and attempt to fly from Brixen to Botzen.

"Kolbe, by order of the Archduke, is to command at Kuntersweg, take
charge of prisoners, and protect the persons and papers of those
Bavarian officers who have been distinguished for their inveteracy
against the Austrian government and the Tyrol from all injury and
ill-treatment; but on no pretence to allow them to proceed from Ritten
to Botzen. At Kaltern Joseph Morandel is chosen commander by the
Archduke, and has received orders what to do. Count Arzt commands at
Nonsburg, and Baron Hormayr is Commissary-General.

"Given at Sand, in Passeyr, on the 9th of April, 1809.

                                            "MARTIN TEIMER,
                                            "ANDREW HOFER, _Publican_."

While it was yet dark, Teimer was hastening over the mountains to
Oberinthal, to join the Austrians; and Hofer to the muster-ground
of the men of Passeyr, appointed on the shooting-match day. With
dawning light, the eagerly-watching peasants, lower down the rivers,
saw sawdust floating on the surface of the Passeyr and the Inn, and
understood the signal; while, among the hills and mountains, billets,
inscribed "'Tis time!" flew from hand to hand, from house to house,
like the fiery cross: and men hastily caught up their rifles, buckled
on their shot-belts, and poured forth.

At three o'clock in the morning the Austrian advanced guard was in
motion. Chastelar and Hormayr harangued their troops, inciting them to
ardour; and before the march had lasted a couple of hours, the thunder
of distant guns and the tumultuous din of alarm-bells resounded through
the valleys. Innumerable fires were discovered on the heights; and as
Chastelar's division advanced up the Drauthal, thousands of men, women,
and children came forth to meet it, waving green boughs, and pressing
forwards to kiss the hands and even the feet of their deliverers. The
force consisted, in all, of sixteen battalions of foot, and three
squadrons of horse.

Meanwhile, Hofer, at the head of five thousand strong, was crossing the
Jauffen, to intercept the enemy between Brixen and the Brenner.

On reaching the muster-ground, a succession of short, abrupt, hearty
cheers had greeted him. He said little more than "Are we all ready,
brothers? Then no time is to be lost;" but his look was as gay as a
bridegroom's, and they started forth like guests hurrying to a wedding.

Passing the little village of St. Leonard, they struck up to the old
Castle of Jauffen; and then began to climb a steep and stony path
resembling the dry bed of a torrent, being strewn with boulders; shaded
here and there with walnuts and budding elders. Presently the path ran
along a precipitous slope, high above the valley, and occasionally
crossing chasms on most insecure-looking bridges of poles, carelessly
laid across, that required Tyrolean nerves to tread in confidence.
These men thought nothing whatever about it, unless the idea occurred
how easily they could pull the loose poles after them if the enemy were
behind.

The last village on their ascent was Walten. Up to this point they had
chatted and occasionally sung a verse or two of some patriotic song;
but now they must husband their breath; there would not be another rood
of level ground. Now pastures, now fir-woods, here and there a lonely
cottage, but still ascending. They get beyond the straggling pines, to
bare, thin turf, with the rock frequently forcing itself through it.
Here and there are cool, bubbling springs, at which many slake their
thirst.

Poles, to guide the winter traveller, are next reached; then, a tall
cross, in passing which each man reverently crosses himself. And now
they are on the topmost ridge.

They look around from their seven thousand feet elevation with a
feeling of satisfaction. This is not the Jauffen, but above it; the
amphitheatre of rocky peaks around and below them, and the wild
glaciers of the Oetzthal and Stubagerthal, are familiar to them all;
yet not so much so as to have lost their power of impressing the
imagination. They stand a few minutes, silent and serious, in the felt
presence of the God who made the mountains. The Tyrolese are deeply
religious: the scenes around them continually bring them into communion
with the God of nature; and the perils by which they are environed, as
constantly remind them of their dependence on the God of redemption.

Onward again they go, down to a turfy little level where Hofer bids
them halt. It is now nearly noon; each man has brought a rye-cake or
two; they make their frugal meal, and drink water from the spring.
Hofer has a bottle of beer, which he shares as far as it will go.

After this temperate repast, the five thousand resume their march.
Among the firs once more; then another rude cross; then a little
oratory in the rock, with a carved and painted representation of the
Saviour on the crucifix in a railed recess, with seats and kneeling
benches in front. Still downwards leads their path, towards Sterzinger
Moss, between banks covered with wild strawberry blossoms.

Hereabouts they fell in with several peasants from the neighbourhood of
Mauls and Mittelwald, who seemed in great excitement. Hofer immediately
stepped on to meet them. "What is going forward, brothers?" cried he.

"Much," replied one of them eagerly. "A French column has taken
possession of the bridge of Laditch, and the Bavarians have seized the
bridge of St. Lorenzen. Both are being furiously contested for, and it
would be well if we could get up with them in time to be of assistance
to our men at either place; but here is another detachment of Bavarians
close upon us."

"Never mind; we'll beat them first, and help the others afterwards."

"Are you Hofer's men?"

"Yes; that is, I am Hofer. We are all brethren. Where are the
Bavarians?"

"In the Valley of the Eisach. They are this side Sterzing already."

"All the better! Never fear!"

"Fear! Certainly not--even our women and girls are not afraid. See,
they are driving our hay-wagons, and singing and shouting as they come.
We could not wait for them, but they will soon be up with us; and the
wagons will afford us excellent cover, with the advantage of height,
for firing on the enemy; besides being moveable barricades."

"Capital! He was a clever fellow who thought of it."

"A woman thought of it--my daughter Margaret!"

"Excellent!--Well, we have no time to lose."

"No, we shall see them directly. They are under Colonel Dittfurt, who
wants to join General Kinkel."

"He shall not, if we can help it.--Brothers! there is little to say.
These two forces must be prevented from meeting. One of them is close
upon us. Prepare for immediate action."

"They're coming!" screamed a woman, standing up on the top of a wagon,
piled high with hay; and her little boy immediately hitting the horses
nearest him with a stick, they pulled forward with a jerk which overset
the woman on the hay, and made some hundreds of men laugh. It has a
curious effect when a multitude of voices utter a "He-he-he!"

Hofer saw at once where to dispose the wagons in the defile; not an
unnecessary direction was given, for he was ever a man of few words;
often a look, a gesture sufficed; and the Tyrolese obeyed him as the
Roman legion obeyed Cæsar in Britain--"_at a word, and at the moment_."

Soon, those who were in the rear heard the crack of rifles in front.
It would seem as though the Bavarians were taken by surprise; for
at first they fell back, returning only a few scattered shot; but
presently they recovered themselves and began a continuous fire of
musketry. As the defile, however, would only permit a small body of
them to enter it, their superiority of numbers was of no advantage to
them in a _coup-de-main_, and only availed in filling up the ranks of
those who were constantly shot down. Four-fifths of their bullets were
wasted on rocks, trees, and brushwood; while their ambuscaded foes,
entrenched behind trusses of hay, tree-stumps, and heaps of stones,
securely picked them off and hardly threw away a shot.

Margaret, quick-witted lass, danced and capered at the top of her
father's wagon, crying and almost screaming, "Never mind the Bavarian
smoke-pellets!"

Towards evening, a strong detachment of French afforded a diversion
in favour of the Bavarians, and assailed the Tyrolese from the other
end of the defile by an incessant fire, for some time without effect.
At length, overpowered by numbers, they were beginning to give way,
when at this critical moment Colonel Gerhardi, the "Adolph" who had
breakfasted at Wolfsthrun, appeared on the heights with between two and
three hundred light horse, and immediately charged the enemy, shouting
loudly. In a few minutes the firing of the French and Bavarians
ceased; the Tyrolese uttered exclamations of joy and thankfulness, some
fell on their knees to bless Heaven, while others cheered on their
allies.

The Bavarians retreated towards Sterzing, with considerable loss of
killed, wounded, and prisoners; while the French division fled in the
opposite direction. Hofer and his men spent the night on the heights;
and with dawning day were again attacked by the Bavarians, who rallied
on Sterzinger Moss; but the Tyrolese sharpshooters, sheltered by the
rocks, made dreadful havoc amongst them, and the artillerymen were
several times shot away from their guns.

At length, the Tyrolese made a desperate charge, armed with spears,
pitchforks, scythes, axes, and any implements they could muster; while
others on the verge of the heights, hurled down masses of rock on their
opponents. After some hours, the Bavarians gave way; and having lost
several of their best officers and above two hundred and forty men
killed and wounded, threw down their arms and surrendered.

The old castle of Wolfsthrun had been prepared, as well as
circumstances permitted, for the reception of wounded men and
prisoners, by Hildegarde Von Sternach; and she was not a little glad
that Adolph's mother had already joined her, when a messenger from him
informed her that five hundred and eighty prisoners were being brought
up to the castle.

Hofer and his companions, like hungry men as they were, were meantime
devouring their remnant of rye-cakes with abundance of Spartan sauce,
and slaking their thirst at the springs. At this moment, Rudolf came
panting up to Hofer, whom he had found with no small difficulty.

"Sandwirth!" exclaimed he, "what a night you must have had! So have
we, but we kept possession of the bridges; and General Chastelar
opportunely came up to us just as the French received reinforcements
from Mantua. You bade me let you know how things were going, or I would
not have left, for the men of Innthal were about to attack them in
front, while the men of Whippthal fell on them from the rear."

Another Tyrolese here came up, and said, "I've been looking out along
the Sterzing road, Sandwirth, and met a man who told me that a strong
force of Bavarians is trying to reach Innsbruck, under General Wrede;
but the peasants swarm the rocks and impede their march, having broken
the bridges, and blocked up the roads with felled trees. I am sorry to
add, that the Bavarians, being much exasperated, are committing every
sort of excess."

"No doubt of their being exasperated, brother," said Hofer. "May be,
we should feel so in their place; but since we see how ugly it is in
them, do not let us, who have not the same excuse, be tempted to the
smallest pillage, cruelty, or violence; otherwise God will cease to
bless us."

How fared it, meanwhile, with Speckbacher? He was sharpening a coulter
outside the stable of his little cottage at Rinn, which stands amidst
a clump of larch and beech-trees; when Maria his wife smilingly came
up to him to show him that his youngest infant had just cut its first
tooth, and to ask him if it did not remind him of a pearl upon a
rose-leaf. Just then, his rustic servant Zoppel put a little slip of
wood into his hand, bearing the inscription roughly endorsed, "'Tis
time!"

Down went the coulter; he kissed wife and infant, and hurried into
the house, followed, wherever he went, by his little son Anderl, who
wistfully eyed him as he took up his rifle.

The last word having been spoken cheerily, Speckbacher sped on his way,
watched only for a minute by Maria, who felt a tear glistening in her
eye and did not wish him to see it. So she re-entered the house.

Meanwhile, the little boy ran after him.

"Father! let me go too!"

"You? you little rogue! No, no, not this time. You must stay at home
and take care of your mother."

"But she doesn't want taking care of, father!--Besides, there's
Zoppel.--Do let me go!"

"When you are a bigger boy, you shall, I promise you."

"Perhaps there will be no fighting _then_."

"All the better."

"Please let me go, father!"

"What good could a little chap like you do?"

"Take care of you, father!"

"Ha, ha! Capital! I hope to take care of myself, dear boy."

"But, father, you want me to be brave, like you, when I come to be a
man. How can I be, unless I look on, and see what brave men do?"

Speckbacher felt his throat swell. He turned about, took the boy in his
arms, lifted him up from the ground, and kissed him several times.

"There," said he. "Go home now, like a good boy. Another time."

There was a tear on the little boy's cheek as he stood watching the
retreating figure--a tear that had not fallen from his own eyes. He
brushed it off--looked at it--and then trotted away into the brushwood;
from whence, as he kept running along, he could get glimpses of his
father, himself unseen. Once he saw Speckbacher pause and look back;
perhaps to see if his little boy had obeyed him and gone home. After
that, he never looked back again; he pressed forward to the things
that were before him.

The young boy still went on; his short, quick steps keeping pretty
well up with his father's strides. Children that walk much with their
parents generally step out well. Now and then he had to force his
way among the bushes, or go a little way round; for which he made up
afterwards by running. He had no settled purpose, except just to keep
his father a little longer in sight.

At length he grew tired and thought he must give up. Just then a man
joined Speckbacher and stopped him to speak to him, pointing towards
Halle. Anderl sat down and had a long rest. When Speckbacher went on
again, the little boy felt refreshed, and was able to follow him with
ease. Presently some men came running down the hills by various paths,
and joined Speckbacher. They all walked on very fast. Afterwards they
reached a vast body of men, who shouted when they saw Speckbacher till
the hills rang again. When he came up to them they had a long parley,
frequently pointing towards Volders and Halle; and they finished by all
walking off together in that direction, with Speckbacher at their head.

The little boy now thought he could not turn back; it was too exciting
to be resisted; and, as he had now had a second good rest, he trotted
on again, keeping up with them as a little dog does with a spirited
horse.

By and by the men halted. They sat down on the grass near a spring, and
pulled out some rye-cakes and began to eat. This was their supper. The
sun was going down, and they did not want to fall on the Bavarians, in
Volders, till dark. Anderl did not know this. He was surprised, and
a little afraid, to find himself alone, so far from home, when night
was drawing on; but he never thought of leaving his father. To look
on and see some thousand men eating while he was fasting, was rather
tantalizing; however, he did so very patiently; and when, after a long
rest, they renewed their march, he saw one, who had been talking in
preference to eating, leave a rye-cake behind him. As soon as they were
sufficiently in advance, Anderl ran down and seized the cake, pursuing
his way while he ate it.

The men were now getting among the trees, overhanging a road, and
moving stealthily so as not to be easily seen. Anderl was startled by
a church-clock striking quite near him; and could imperfectly make out
white buildings here and there, a river, and a bridge. Presently a
discharge of fire-arms was heard in advance. Some horsemen dashed along
the road, and were shot down. Others dashed after them, and shared the
same fate. Others again and again filled up the road, maintaining a
fire that would have been destructive had it not, as little Anderl
observed, been expended on bushes and trees. Presently a bullet nearly
hit him; only, _as it did not_, he picked it up and put it in his
pocket. At last he had collected quite a little heap, regardless of the
shot that whistled round him.

By and by he observed that his father, towards whom he had crept with
the instinct of affection, ceased firing, though the enemy was not yet
silenced. What could be the reason? It struck him that he must have
expended all his bullets; which, indeed, was the case. So he ran up
to him with his handkerchief, which was now quite full of them, and
plucked him by the sleeve, saying, "Father, here are some more to go on
with."

It would have been worth a world to you to see Speckbacher's start!

"_You_ here?" said he, in amaze.

"Yes, father; I could not bear to lose sight of you, so I kept running
on till the firing began; and then, when I saw how the Bavarians wasted
their bullets, I picked up as many as I could. If you'll use these,
father, I'll soon bring you some more."

Speckbacher could not speak. He caught him to his heart, gave him a
hug, held him there a moment, and then set him down.

"Off with you into cover, you young rogue," said he; "never mind any
more bullets."

And, handing a few of them to a comrade who stood close by, he
said, with a choke in his voice, "These will hit the mark, surely,
considering how they have been brought!"

That night Speckbacher and his companions drove the Bavarians out of
Volders. At daybreak they were at the gates of Halle.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

THE FIRST SUCCESS.


The warm spring sun is shining on a valley watered by more than one
winding river, and with green pastures dotted with cows and sheep
peacefully feeding. It is closed in by hills green to their summits,
with only a few patches of snow in their hollows. Behind these soar
craggy and fearful rocks, above which wheel one or two vultures, and
high overhead the kingly eagle; who perhaps discerns some human quarry
in the depths below. Dead bodies must certainly be lying here and there
in the gorges; for now and then carrion crows, sated with their impure
repast, rise slowly on their flapping wings, and fly heavily away.

In the sunniest and prettiest part of the valley is a little village
of some dozen whitewashed huts, that look clean and comfortable at a
distance. The village is surely deserted! not a creature seems in it
except an old purblind woman, sitting outside her door on a stone; and
she is straining her cracked voice in vain efforts to make herself
heard.

"Hannes!--Lenora!--Franz!" cries she, quite in a rage: and then
pausing, as if spent,--"Why doesn't somebody answer? They've all gone
away and left me, I do believe! Here's a condition to be in! Suppose
now my clothes had caught fire, or the French were to come, or a wolf,
or an evil spirit--precious help I should have! This is the way we old
folks are treated, as soon as ever we can't slave for other people any
longer. Hallo! some of you! Am I to split my throat? You'll come home
and find me dead some of these days. Dear me! they won't mind; it's no
use spending my breath. The village is asleep or dead, I think; I can
hear a crow caw a mile off!"

When the peevish old woman became quite quiet, she heard a footstep
slowly approaching her; and presently a man lounged up to her.

"Why, Franz, that must be you!" cried she; "I know your step, you
always drag your feet along the ground so."

"So would anybody's feet," said Franz, "if they were as tired as I am."

"Why, what has tired you?--lying under a hedge, watching the cows."

"Don't you go to believe, mother, I've been wasting my time like
_that_. The cows are competent to take care of themselves."

"What have you been doing, then?"

"What have I been doing? Why, now, there's a question! Why, the world's
turned upside down, I think; and you sit here, blinking in the sun, and
know nothing about it."

"How am I to know anything if you all run away and leave me? What's
happened?"

"What's happened! Why, Speckbacher has taken Halle!"

"No!--"

"--Has, though--That's one thing. When you've given over disbelieving
that, I'll tell you something else."

"Well, say thy say, tiresome boy."

"Hofer's in Innsbruck!"

"The Sandwirth? What, prisoner?"

"Prisoner! No, mother, quite the other way. We've turned out the
Bavarians!"

"What, out of Innsbruck?"

"Aye, out of Innsbruck. Twenty thousand of us got together on the
heights about the city--"

"Thou must needs have a finger in the pie, I warrant thee!--"

"Well, I thought, as there were so many of us, I might as well see what
turned up. Well, first we cut off all their retreats, by girdling them
in all round, blocking up the roads, and breaking down the bridges.
Then, we opened a brisk fire on the Bavarians who were posted on the
upper bridge of the Inn, and drove them from their guns."

"What then?"

"Then we rushed on, waving our hats, and shouting, 'Long live the
Emperor!' striking down some of the enemy with the butt-ends of
muskets, throwing others over the bridge into the water, and following
the rest into the city like a swarm of bees. We soon made them feel we
could _sting_, too. You never heard such a cracking of rifles in your
life. Five thousand shooting-matches at once?--Pshaw, nothing to come
near it. Then such a smoke! Then such a noise! Every one for himself
and all the world else--hallooing, shouting, capering, as if they had
no end to their strength, and sounding the pig-call in derision."

"I'll warrant them!"

"General Kinkel and his men were garrisoning the town; but what could
they do, you know, mother? They knew the ways of the city, however--the
streets, passages, gates, and so forth--better than we, so they were
soon inside the houses, peppering down upon the Tyrolese from the
windows. Well, now you'd surely think, that as we had the advantage of
them in the open ground, the Bavarians would now have the advantage of
us from the houses. Not so, mother. How it was, I know not, but they
could not keep their own: our sharpshooters picked off every man-jack
that showed but the tip of his nose at the windows; so at length they
threw down their arms--"

"They _did_?"

"And cried for mercy!--Didn't we make an uproar then! However,
there was still a good bit of fighting; here and there were strong
posts they wouldn't give up, and stout hearts that wouldn't give
in. At the barracks, I believe every man was shot down. At last,
they--the Tyrolese, I should say--got to the house of the Bavarian
Commander-in-Chief--Kinkel, that is,--and were calling to him to
surrender, when up comes Colonel Dittfurt--"

"Who's he?"

"Oh, mother, you ought to know by this time. He it was, you know, that
was the principal cause of the Tyrol being separated from Austria, and
that lately said, 'With two regiments of cavalry added to his infantry,
he would cut every one of us ragamuffins down.'"

"Ah, no good ever comes of brag."

"Well, I don't know about that," said Franz, running his fingers
through his rough hair; "but no good came of it to him this time, at
any rate. He had already got two bullets in his body, they say; but as
soon as his house was attacked, he rushed forth, waving his sword over
his head. A third ball then struck him near the heart; blood came out
of his mouth, and down he came upon his knees. Some of our men hastened
up to take him prisoner; he turns about his head, and faintly calls to
his men, 'You dogs, don't be cowards,' or something to that purpose;
and evidently did not even then give in. Whizz! comes another bullet,
which hits him in the head, and lays him along the ground."

"Well, Franz, he died like a soldier--"

"Mother, he isn't dead yet--Don't you hurry me--We then captured him
and carried him off to the guard-house--"

"_You?_"

"Not exactly I, but our people. And there, as he lay, ready to
die from loss of blood, says he to one of our fellows--Rudolf, in
fact,--'Who is your leader, young man?'--'We've none in particular,'
says Rudolf,--which was true enough, only he needed not to have exposed
us so, just then, for no good, to a man of the Colonel's quality,
who, of course, thought it very despicable of us. If I'd been Rudolf,
I'd have clapped a dozen names together, mother, and said 'that's our
commander.'"

"Then thou wouldst have been a fool, Franz,--and thou art little
better. Well, is that all?"

"No--'We've no chief in particular,' says Rudolf--the ninny!--'We
all,' says he, 'fight for God,' says he, 'and for our Emperor, and our
fatherland,' says he. 'One for all, and all for one,' says he."

"Ah, as long as folks will do that last," said the old woman, sighing,
"they're sure to win the day. But their evil tempers, and evil
passions, and piques, and private interests, tugging at their hearts
like so many evil spirits, part them asunder; and then the Evil One
laughs!"

"Well," said Franz, "all that's beyond me; and you can't expect a
young fellow just come from such a stirring scene, to be much in the
humour for preaching: but, however, you haven't heard all yet. Colonel
Dittfurt could not make this out--(no wonder!)--it would have made him
think very small of us, if he had. 'Well,' says he, 'I can't believe
that, young man; for I've _seen_ your Commander-in-Chief,' says he,
'frequently rallying you to-day,' says he, 'and rushing past me on a
milk-white horse,' says he. Well; when that got about, somebody wiser
than the rest said dying men could often see further than others into
the spirit-world; and that, 'twas very likely, one of the saints,
of a martial turn, had really headed us, though invisibly; and that
therefore it was most agreeable to reason to suppose it was St. James."

"St. James? why St. James?" said the old woman slowly. "Was he a
fighting man?"

"There you pose me," replied Franz; "but, you see, he's the patron
saint of the city!"

"Ah, that explains!" said his mother. "And did the Colonel die upon
that?"

"Oh no, he's lingering now, but quite given over; and has a priest with
him. Father Donay--you know him, mother?"

"No, I don't."

"You know _of_ him then, and that's much the same--almost as good."

"Or almost as bad, Franz. I don't know any good of him."

"Why, now, didn't he get me out of a scrape, when I'd like to have been
shot?"

"By telling a lie, Franz."

"Fiddlestick, mother! 'A charitable fraud,' he called it, mother."

"Well, Franz, he'll take his payment out of you, some day or other,
'tis my opinion, if he finds you can be of any use to him."

"If I can be of any use to him, certainly I will, out of gratitude,
mother. One good turn, you know, deserves another."

"And one bad turn--I mean one bad or deceitful or treacherous action to
screen a companion is often followed, in due course, by that companion
being asked, nay, commanded, to do some dirty trick in return."

"Well, mother, you will have your say. But I was going to tell you,
that Martin Teimer joined us just as Dittfurt fell, and helped us well;
and as soon as it was known that the Commander-in-Chief was captured
and mortally wounded, the Bavarians lost all heart, and laid down their
arms to a man. So, then we had jolly work!"

"Ah, don't tell me all about the slaying and slaughtering!"

"Why, there was _none_, mother! A Tyrolese kill a captured foe in cold
blood?--Oh, fie!"

"All about the sacking and pillaging, then--"

"Well, a few of the Jews' houses were attacked; but to no good; for
Father Joachim and the Sandwirth made our fellows refund everything
they had thought lawful spoil--"

"Ha, ha!"

"Oh, come, it was no joking matter. I think a Christian might fleece a
Jew, without much harm done. However, others thought differently; and
'tis a certain fact, mother, that one of our fellows, who had carried
off the heavy iron door of a Jew's strong room before the stir was made
by the Sandwirth, and got clear of the city with it, walked fourteen
hours, that is to say all last night, with that great heavy iron door
on his back, thinking it mighty clever to get it safe to his cottage."

"What did he mean to do with it?"

"I doubt if he knows, any more than I do. However, he had been at home
an hour or so, and was telling his wife, who had just been confined,
all about the day's work, with great glee; when--in walks the priest.
'What have we here?' says he, stumbling over the iron door. As soon
as ever he heard how it was come by,--'Now you go,' says the priest,
'and carry that door all the way back again. The commandment says, Thou
shalt not steal, without saying of Jew or Christian; take it back this
minute! It will be a suitable penance; for believe me, my son, thou
hast sinned.' So the poor fellow heaved it up again, though his back
was half broken already, and trudged away with it, as meek as a lamb;
and when I met him, he was half way to Innsbruck."

"He'll come back with a lightened heart, as well as lightened
shoulders, Franz."

"What know I?" said Franz with indifference. "After such a hard day's
fight as we'd had, I think we might have had a few pickings. And there
were the simple fellows that had never been in Innsbruck before,
rambling in great parties about the streets, staring and making their
remarks about everything, and crowding into the cathedral to see the
emperor Max's great monument with those grim iron giants of dead kings
to guard it--and women and girls pouring out of the old part of the
city, to give us cakes, and cream-cheeses, and wine, and bread, and
beer--whatever came first to hand, and laughing and chattering, and
praising us, and saying what a glorious day!"

"Well, it _was_ a glorious day," said the old woman reflectively.

"So much, done so quickly!" continued Franz. "Why, mother! the town
was ours by eleven o'clock! How surprised some of the men looked when
they heard the clocks strike!--They had just then discovered and laid
hold of the Imperial Eagle on the emperor Max's tomb; and, after tying
a lot of red ribands round its neck and legs, they set it up aloft and
carried it through the streets, shouting and singing, and saying they'd
always be true to it. Meantime, another lot of fellows had come upon
the pictures of our Franzel[A] and Hannes,[B] and had hauled them down
and were carrying _them_ about, too, triumphing and making merry and
crying they would shed their last drop of blood for them!"

"What a pity our Franzel was not there to hear it," said his mother;
"it would have warmed his dear heart."

"They set the pictures against a sort of arch," pursued Franz, "and put
lighted candles round them, and bawled 'Long live the Emperor!' There
was a good deal of foolery in it."

"They were in mad spirits at their success, and no wonder," said the
old woman; "especially if they had made free with the contents of the
brandy-shops."

"No, mother, no.--Not one of them was drunk, nor the least inclined
that way--I saw many of them drinking water, as if they could have
drunk the sea dry; and others smacking their lips after a bottle of
beer, or munching a rye-cake as if it were a feast for the emperor.
Towards nightfall, they were completely tired out; numbers lay down
to rest, in the streets, and were asleep in a moment; some on straw,
some without it; while others prepared to camp out all night in the
orchards. I thought I might as well be walking homewards as that, and
so I started off: no doubt the Bavarians will be down upon them with
reinforcements to-day or to-morrow."

"And then they'll lose all they've won," said the old woman. "Well,
that will be a pity."

She sat musing upon it, while Franz went in-doors, and presently came
out again, devouring a great rye-cake, and a lump of cheese. He sat
down on an inverted milk-pail, and, while he continued eating, he
watched a girl who was coming up from the valley with a long hazel wand
in her hand.

She was dressed in a short, scanty petticoat of bright grass-green,
with a black bodice that was laced in front over a chemise with short
full sleeves of snowy whiteness. On her head she wore a small black,
sugar-loaf hat, with a gay riband tied round it. Her appearance, at
a distance, was excessively picturesque; but when she drew near, she
proved to be very plain, with thick ankles, a thick waist, and large,
red, coarse hands.

"Here comes Lenora," said Franz, at length; speaking with his mouth
full.

"Soh!" said the old woman, with a kind of snort, "she is vouchsafing to
return home at last, is she? She might have come to look after me in
the course of this long morning, I should think. But girls now are not
what girls used to be."

It would appear from this speech, that Lenora ought to have joined the
couple who were seated outside the cottage, with the penitent air of
one who had neglected her duty; but, on the contrary, she took up quite
another tone.

"So, Mr. Franz!" shouted she, in a voice that would have filled St.
Paul's, "you're come back again at last, are you, sir, after leaving me
these twenty-four hours to do your work!--you might, at any rate, have
had the civility to tell me you were going; but no, not you!"

"What's the matter now?" said Franz, doggedly.

"What's the matter?" repeated Lenora, still chafing; "why, have not
I, in addition to my own work, had to do every bit of man's work that
has been done about the place? Who, but for me, would have watered
the horse, turned out the cows, sheep, and goats after milking, and a
hundred things besides? As I was driving our sheep to pasture, Gaspard
looked over the hedge, and 'Do the same for me, my good girl, will
you?' says he, 'for I'm off with my rifle.' So there was I with two
flocks of sheep on my hands, besides the cows and the goats; and, not
knowing exactly how many sheep Gaspard had, I counted them twice very
carefully, and, the second time, I missed one. So I wasn't by any means
sure whether I had counted them wrong the first time, or whether one
had strayed; but somehow I thought one had strayed, because I fancied I
remembered that the number was an odd number, and now it was even; and
also that I had remarked a weak-eyed, rather ill-looking ewe, that had
something particular in its bleat. Well, I could see nothing of this
ewe, so I made sure it had strayed; and, as it belonged to a neighbour,
I was even more sorry for it than if it had been my own. So I sought it
here, and I sought it there; first in all the likely, and next in all
the unlikely places; and, meanwhile, the sun was scorching hot, as if
it had been August. At last I got to the pass where one of your cows
pitched over last spring--"

"That was a good way off," muttered Franz.

"Truly it was," said the girl, with self-pity; "however, there I
trudged; and just as I had got to the brink of the ravine I heard that
queer-sounding bleat. I looked down, and there was the ewe, who had
toppled over and fallen into the upper part of a thorn-bush, from which
she could not get out. So I had to scramble down, get hold of her, and
lay her across my shoulders, climb up the bank again, and carry her all
the way back. Such a weight she was! All this trouble you might have
saved me."

--"Lenora!"--

"Well?"

"We've taken Innsbruck!"

"No!"--

He had to tell his story all over again.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII.

INNSBRUCK.


Picture to yourself an old cathedral-town in the midst of a valley
about three miles across, hemmed in by magnificent mountains six to
eight thousand feet high, from whose summits the wolves are said to
look down into the very streets. The city stands on a deep, impetuous
river--the Inn; and hence its name, Innsbruck, or Inn's Bridge.

This city is but of moderate extent; but few towns of its size contain,
in the modern part, better and handsomer buildings; and its suburbs are
remarkable for cleanliness and elegance. The old part of the city is
picturesque enough: there you may see tumble-down old houses nodding
with age, having rickety outside staircases leading to old, rickety
wooden galleries or balconies; crumbling walls kept together with
old timbers nailed outside in various quaint fashions; upper floors
overhanging lower ones, and supported with rows of carved brackets, or
by poles imbedded in the pavement below; antique gables, fantastically
decorated, with grotesque heads on the spouts between them.

Many of these antiquated streets have low arcades, which afford capital
shelter to women who sell fruit, cakes, cheeses, sausages, and get
through a great deal of gossip. The shops are homely and primitive,
with very few outward allurements to attract customers. They are mostly
in the "general" line, and deal indifferently in groceries, medicines,
straw-hats, coarse thread, ready-made garments, and old rags and
bottles.

In these dwellings a great many generations have been born and brought
up; have eaten, drunk, slept, talked over the news of the day, thought
the world was coming to an end because of some matter which the next
generation thought infinitely unimportant and succeeding generations
have forgotten altogether;--marketed, made good bargains, bad bargains,
grown poor, grown well-to-do in the world, fallen sick, got well again,
gone to weddings and funerals, gone to church at six o'clock in the
morning, made friends, made enemies, been disappointed in friends,
lived down the slanders of enemies, found life a very hard battle,
sometimes won it, sometimes not, resolved never to be deceived again,
or to do a wrong or foolish thing any more, found that cheerfulness
is a salve for many reverses, and contentment a great set-off against
straitened means, remembered how much better everything was in their
young days, grown old before they were aware of it, ailed a little,
dropped aside and out of sight, except of the priest, doctor, and one
or two old friends,--in short, been, and done, and felt, and enjoyed,
and suffered, just like the rest of the world.

If the spiders could talk, doubtless they would be able to tell you
many interesting stories of these people; for the human heart is the
same all over the world, but its experiences are infinitely various; as
various as human faces.

At the court-end are the triumphal arch built by Maria Theresa; the
Neustadt, a fine wide street, with a fountain in the centre; the
town-hall, the theatre, and the spacious palace assigned as the
residence of the governor of the Tyrol. These buildings are surrounded
by public pleasure-grounds, well planted, and extending to the fine
chestnut avenue on the banks of the river, which is a favourite resort
of the townspeople in fine weather.

The market-place, too, is very gay. There you may see old women in red
jackets and witch-like hats, squatted behind a small spread of eggs,
butter, salad, onions, lettuces, &c.: young girls, in tight-laced
purple bodices, and short, full, snow-white sleeves, arranging baskets
of peaches and apricots; children, with brown, ruddy faces, offering
for sale large nosegays of rhododendrons, harebells, cowslips,
anemones, lilies-of-the-valley, honeysuckles; or little heaps of small
bright scarlet strawberries; men, unloading ox-wains of fire-wood, or
shouldering little sacks of corn, steering their way amid piles of
coarse earthenware, spread on the ground.

But the chief glory of Innsbruck is its churches; especially its
_Hofkirch_, or Cathedral, the wonders of which are hardly to be
sufficiently explored in a single day. Here is the famous tomb of the
Emperor Maximilian the First, who died in 1519: and who is represented
at the top of the tomb, kneeling, with his face towards the altar.
Round the sides of this tomb, which is about six feet high and thirteen
feet in length, are a wonderful series of what have been poetically
called "pictures in marble"--exquisite carvings, that is, in Carrara
marble, of various events in the Emperor's life. Guarding this tomb,
as it were, in stern and solemn array, are eight-and-twenty colossal
bronze statues of famous princes, warriors, and chieftains; including
our own king Arthur. "When the gloom of evening," says Inglis, "begins
to fall among these dark-visaged and gigantic kings and knights, the
effect is almost terrific."

Round and about this wondrous tomb, with looks of simple surprise
and admiration, strayed many of Hofer's rustic companions on the
famous 11th of April, as well as Hofer himself. When his heart
heaved within him as he gazed on the effigies of those mighty men
of renown, he little thought that, in times to come, times not far
distant, travellers from distant lands would flock to that old
church, to see--not the eight-and-twenty champions, nor the kneeling
emperor,--but, the presentment of a humble, heroic Tyrolese peasant,
with face upturned to Heaven, one hand grasping the national banner,
the other holding the barrel of the rifle slung from his shoulder. "We
know what we are," said poor Ophelia, "but we know not what we shall
be."

Even in the gladness of that day, there was a heaviness at his heart.
His companions were shouting, singing, and waving their feathered hats
round the Imperial eagle as they carried it through the streets--_he_
was standing, lonely, in the church; kneeling; praying.

It was not a long prayer, but a hearty one; a prayer such as God loves.
"O God! I thank Thee for this day's success, but I know not whither it
will lead. Oh, guide us, guide us, for Thy goodness' sake, O Lord, in
Christ Jesus!"

It _was_ a success. Eight thousand French and Bavarians had laid down
their arms, and surrendered at discretion, with their eagles, colours,
and munitions of war; while only twenty-six Tyrolese had been killed,
and forty-two wounded. Hofer personally knew some of the twenty-six,
however, and felt a manly sorrow for them: _only_ twenty-six dead men
may leave behind them a good many sad hearts.

The enemy's cavalry took to flight, but were stopped and made prisoners
by Speckbacher, in the meadows near Halle.

Meanwhile, our friends in the green jackets, who were perambulating
the streets of Innsbruck, assembled themselves together in front of
the Palace, and amused themselves by shooting down the Bavarian lion
from over the entrance; after which their patriotic souls were vexed by
seeing the hated blue and white stripes of Bavaria decorating sundry
buildings; whence a great cry for paint-pots arose, and they ransacked
the oilmen's shops for all their stores of black and yellow paint, and
with hog's hair brushes and ladders, set themselves diligently to work
to efface the enemy's emblems and substitute the Imperial colours.

Some others of these merry hearts thought nothing wanting but a little
good music; and, as all the instruments they were able to muster
among themselves, proved to be two fifes, two fiddles, two rusty iron
pot-lids, and a few Jews'-harps, they did not scruple to impress the
Bavarian band into their service, and make them patrol the city playing
triumphal tunes in honour of their own defeat.

There were likewise certain native ballad-singers of the itinerant
order, who turned a good many pence, that is to say kreutzers, this
day, by vocalizing on their own account, at tavern-doors and in public
places, to the great delight of the Tyrolese, who sat on benches and on
door-steps, listening to them while they quaffed hot coffee in thick
ale-glasses, or tasted for the first, and perhaps last time in their
lives, iced rum and water.

Others of them were not too tired to get up a game of bowls in the
market-place, which excited immense merriment among themselves,
and crowds of townspeople at the windows, with whom they talked as
comfortably as if they had known them a hundred years. Just as they had
had enough of it, Punch very opportunely made his appearance, and kept
them amused till it was dark. Then they lay down on the ground, in and
about the town, and slept soundly all night.

Hofer thought he should like to see a play. So, to the theatre he went,
where, on asking what there was to pay, the money-taker with a bow
replied, "Nothing." So he walked into the boxes, and picked out the
very best place; where his remarkable dress and person drew on him the
attention of every one in the house.

But if they thought a good deal of him, he was very little aware of
it; for there were a great many things to employ his attention. In
the first place, there seemed to him a great waste of wax lights;
half the number would have been quite sufficient. In the second
place, the ladies' dresses appeared to him a great deal too low, too
short, and too scanty: he hardly liked to look at them, and was very
glad to see no other Tyrolese in the house. In the third place, the
orchestral music, when it struck up, quite took him by surprise: he had
a sensitive though untutored ear, and a tender heart; its dying falls
and gradual swells, its minors, its concords, its plaintive and its
impassioned strains, nearly overpowered him.

Luckily, the curtain drew up, the music ceased, and the play began.
Hofer could not understand much of it. But, on the whole, he thought
it funny, and concluded it clever,--and did not know whether he should
ever care to go to a play again.

"They seem to make very light of swearing," thought he; "I have
frequently heard them take God's holy name in vain. Some of their
dresses, also, are immodest, and as for their music, it makes a man's
heart like cream-cheese. The story, too, by what I can make out of
their acting, is of two young persons who deceive their parents very
much, tell many lies, and think only of their own selfish wishes; yet
they are rewarded and applauded at the last, while the old people are
laughed at for having been ill-used. So that, altogether, I am glad to
see none of our dear Tyrolese here to-night, for it would soften and
demoralize them."

With these reflections, the thoughtful father of a family quitted his
seat at the end of the performance, and stood about in the lobby,
looking rather bewildered and uncertain which was his way out; while
many smart townspeople of the upper classes looked at him with
curiosity and interest as they passed. Our English readers may wonder
that, after such a day of stern realities, people could be found with
minds sufficiently disengaged to enter a theatre;--but our continental
neighbours are as fond of their play as--what shall we say?--an
Englishman of his dinner. Both parties _can_ go without it, if there be
some stringent necessity; but never from inclination.

Hofer was not quite so new to Innsbruck as the generality of his
comrades. He had never passed a night there, indeed, but he had
occasionally, though rarely, gone thither on business connected with
his trade, which had brought him into some slight acquaintance with a
brother innkeeper, by name Michael Stumff, whose sign was the "Goldener
Adler."

As Hofer stood in the lobby of the theatre, spoken to by none, though
gazed on by many, a pretty looking young woman, with a respectably
dressed young man for her companion, came up and accosted him.

"So you have come to see our theatre, Sandwirth," said she, frankly.
"Do you not know who I am? I am Alouise Stumff, Michael Stumff's
daughter."

"Ah, Alouise! I did not know you at first," said Hofer, looking
pleased, and holding out his brown hand to her rather red one.

"Are you going to spend the night in Innsbruck, Sandwirth?" said
Alouise, who addressed him with perfect ease and a little affability,
as if it were kind of her to take notice of him. "My father will be
very glad if you will take a bed at his house."

"That will suit me well," said Hofer, in his plain, homely manner. "I
was considering where to bestow myself. So I will go home with you, if
it please you, Alouise."

"Come along, then," said Alouise briskly. "This young man is a
neighbour's son, Sandwirth, Leopold Mayer; we are very old friends."

When they reached the "Goldener Adler," Michael Stumff was surprised
and rather pleased to see his old acquaintance.

"Why, Sandwirth, this is an unexpected honour," said he. "You are
kindly welcome."

"Praised be Jesus Christ," said Hofer, reverently using the greeting
customary among the Tyrolese; but, perceiving that the other did not
respond "for ever and ever, Amen," he after a pause, continued:

"Unexpected enough, it may be, Michael Stumff; but an honour I cannot
think it. However, I am glad you say I am kindly welcome."

"How can you be otherwise," said Stumff, "when you have performed such
a glorious work this day, leading the men of Passeyr on to victory?"

"Oh no, oh no," said Hofer, "there was no leading in the case. We were
all just as equal as so many sheep. God was our shepherd."

"The Bavarians were more like sheep, to my thinking," said Stumff, with
a jovial laugh. "They _did_ run, to be sure!"

"Better for both parties that they should save us the necessity of
shooting them," said Hofer. "However, I don't expect we've seen the
last of them."

"I was just going to ask you, Sandwirth--(let us have supper,
Alouise)--Surely you don't think them put down with one day's drubbing?"

"Surely, no," said Hofer; "I look to see them again in a day or two,
or at furthest, by the end of the week, and then with God's blessing,
we'll drub them again."

"And shall you all keep together here, in Innsbruck, till then?"

"We cannot. This is a busy time with us in the field; we must plough
and sow."

"But, directly your backs are turned the enemy will come back! Besides,
what are you going to do with all your prisoners?"

"I'll think of it on my pillow," said Hofer. "Now, supper."

For he was true to the saying his wife quoted of him. "One thing at a
time will last the longer." And besides, the Wirth of the "Goldener
Adler" was not Speckbacher; and he had no mind to tell him all his
plans before he had digested them.

"Well, and so you've been to the play," said Stumff, slicing away at a
ham, and hospitably loading Hofer's plate. "How did you like it?"

"Some things I liked; others I liked not."

"What did you like?"

"The house was beautiful as a dream--but where was the good of it?
Directly the play is over all melts away, like a day's frost!"

"_All?_ what?"

"Why,--the impression."

"Oh! well, but we can renew the impression every night; and we do not
want it all day."

"Truly no," said Hofer. "And I doubt its being good to renew it every
night."

"Why?"

"Too softening and enervating."

Stumff laughed a jolly laugh.

"Did not you like the music, Sandwirth?" cried Alouise.

"Too much," said he, sighing. "It made my heart ready to burst."

"The dancing, then?"

"Not at all."

Alouise smiled. "Oh!" said she, "you are getting too grave and steady,
at your time of life; but you would have liked it when you were young."

"Perhaps I should--perhaps I should not; but that would not have made
it good or bad."

"Then, the ladies' dresses, Sandwirth?"

"Ah!" with a grimace.

Stumff laughed. "What of them?" said he.

"Too little dress--too much exposure."

"Why, there's no satisfying you, Sandwirth."

"Oh, yes," said he, smiling. "One play has satisfied me--I don't want
to go again."

"Your daughter would like it," said Alouise, decisively.

"I should not wish to give her a taste for such things," said Hofer.
"She is perfectly content as she is."

"And that's more than I can say of _my_ girl sometimes," said Stumff,
with a smile and a shrug, as Alouise left them for a few minutes.

"I wonder," said Hofer, after a short silence, "that you let _her_ go
to the theatre."

"I should be considered quite a bear, not only by her, but by all
Innsbruck, if I denied her," said Stumff. "No, no, Sandwirth,--we
town-folks are not quite the same with you village-folks,--it does our
girls no hurt, I believe--or, if it does, we can't help it. And now,
as you seem tired, I'll show you your bed. What! you must take your
dearly-beloved rifle along with you, hey? Ha, ha!"

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII.

STILL SUCCESSFUL.


When Michael Stumff came down to breakfast the next morning, he looked
round for his guest in vain.

"Where's the Sandwirth?" said he to Alouise.

"Half way to the Brenner, I suppose," said Alouise. "Why, father, you
must have slept heavily, if you did not hear the uproar this morning!
The alarm-bells began to ring before it was light, and a dozen country
fellows came running down the street, bawling 'Sandwirth! Sandwirth!'
Open flew the Sandwirth's window; he gives a _jödel_[1] that might be
heard a mile off, which makes them stop short. 'Here I am, my boys,'
cries he, 'what's the matter?' The next moment they were all under
his window. 'Speckbacher took Halle yesterday!' cries one. 'Hurra!'
cries Hofer. 'But the French and Bavarians are coming down upon us
from the Brenner,' cries another. 'Aha! then we'll go to meet them,'
cries Hofer; 'I'll be with you this minute.' And his door flew open.
I just popped my head out of mine, and said, 'Sandwirth, I'll be down
directly, if you will wait for some breakfast.' 'No time, thank you,'
replied he, running along the gallery. 'Just one cup of coffee!'
cried I. 'No, dear; we are going to breakfast on gunpowder,' says he,
laughing: and so off. Dear me, it quite set my heart a-beating; it was
all in such a moment. Who knows? Perhaps the Bavarians may be masters
of Innsbruck again, before nightfall, father?"

"There's no knowing, child."

"I don't know that I could have done less than ask the Sandwirth home,
father, when I saw him last night, standing about, in the lobby,
looking quite puzzled."

"Certainly not, child. The poor, simple fellow"--said Stumff, with an
air of complacent superiority--"would have come to mischief of one sort
or another, for he knows as little as a child. A brave, honest heart,
and a good marksman, Alouise; and when you've said that, you've said
all. Give me my breakfast quick, child, that I may go out and look
about me a little."

Alouise poured out his coffee, and gave him a slice of bread, and then
hurried to the house door, calling eagerly to one or two persons who
were hurrying along, to ask them what was going forward. They only
replied, "Atzwanger is turning out the armed burghers," and ran off;
and her father, with his mouth full, soon followed, bidding her take
good care of the house. So there was she, alone in the midst of bustle,
feeling solitude doubly lonely, till at length she called to a little
boy who was cleaning knives, and said,--

"Dolf, run down to the gates, and bring me word what is going on."

When he was gone, she thought he would perhaps not return; and felt
more solitary than ever, till the young man who had escorted her to the
theatre dropped in.

"We're in a fine mess," said he. "Here are the Bavarians coming back."

"Aye--what shall we do? Perhaps they will get possession of Innsbruck
again."

"Very likely. For my part, I hope they will."

"Oh, Leopold! How can you be so unpatriotic?"

"Why, you see, Alouise, Buonaparte is sure to get the better of us in
the end, so he may as well beat us at once and have done with it."

"Perhaps he won't beat us in the end."

"Oh, yes, he will."

"That's no argument. Why don't you go and help fight?"

"Thank you, I'm not that way inclined. I told Atzwanger I'd sprained
my trigger-finger. What's all that hammering about, up stairs? Are you
putting up defences?"

"Oh, no! A poor lame man lodges in our attic, who is amusing himself by
making a barrel-organ, with a curious set of dancing automatons at the
top. His whole heart is in it. He thinks the Tyrolese war nothing in
comparison. Indeed, I doubt if he knows there is one."

"Oh, come!"

"Well, I'll take him up his breakfast, and hear what he has to say
about it; and you can hear what I say and what he says, if you prick up
your ears."

Leopold went to the foot of a dark, steep back-stair, up which Alouise
tripped, with a coffee-pot and some bread; and after she had tapped at
the door he heard the following dialogue:--

"Come in!"

"I've brought you some breakfast, Martin."

"Thank you; though I am almost too busy to eat it."

"How are you getting on?"

"Take care! don't tread on that barrel!"

"I don't see one."

"Not a beer-barrel, but an organ-barrel."

"Oh, I see; well, do you know what a bustle we were in, yesterday?"

"Chimney-sweeps?"

"Chimney-sweeps! no! Why, the Tyrolese took Innsbruck, and drove out
the Bavarians!"

"You don't say so! Soho! hum! A pretty piece of work. I'll hear all
about it presently, or the glue will get cold. I'm afraid, you see,
Alouise, that this glue is not strong enough; which is the reason why
the woodwork will not stick. Soho!--poor Tyrolese!"

"Poor Bavarians, you mean! Why, the Tyrolese won the day!"

"Oh, did they so really? Well, now,--humph!--poor fellows!"

"And we had one of them to sleep here, last night."

"Really, really! By the bye, are you anything of a mechanician?"

"Not in the least."

"Then it's no use asking you the thing I want to know. Hum!--poor
Innsbruckers--poor Tyrolese, I mean."

"But, Martin, we Innsbruckers _are_ Tyrolese."

"To be sure, to be sure--who doesn't know that? This tiresome glue!
That was just what I was saying."

"That? What?"

"Well--now you puzzle me--I think this will stick, at last."

"Well, I see you don't take any interest in the matter, so I won't
waste your time. Perhaps the Bavarians will have recovered possession
of the town before bedtime."

"Perhaps so, perhaps so--nothing more likely."

She ran down stairs, laughing. "Just the old story," said she to
Leopold; "every man thinking his own affairs of more importance than
those of all the world besides. How now, Dolf?" to the boy, who ran in
glowing and panting.

"There's fine work, mistress. They're barricading the gates with casks
and wagons, and closing all the houses. May I go back?"

"No, no, you must not leave me."

"I'll bring you word every ten minutes how things are going on.--It's
so jolly!"

"Well, Dolf, if you will promise me very faithfully indeed to do that,
you may go; and I'll give you a cake at supper-time besides. But mind
you keep an eye, if you can, on my father."

Away scampered the boy; and Leopold prepared to go too.

"Don't you go," said Alouise. "I shall be afraid."

"Oh, very well," said he, stretching himself and yawning. She gave him
an old newspaper, which he began to pore over; but on returning to the
kitchen after a short absence, she found him gone.

"That's just the way," said she to herself, pouting; "much he cares
for my safety, in spite of the pretty things he said to me last night.
I suppose Nannette will be off next, if I do not go to look after her."

Nannette was stretching her head out of one of the upper windows, so
intent on catching all she could of the distant uproar, that she was
not aware of her mistress's presence till Alouise gave a smart pluck at
her dress. However, Alouise had no sooner set her to scour the bedrooms
than she herself went up to the very top of the house, which had, like
many of the dwellings in the Tyrol, a sort of open story or penthouse
raised over the flat roof, from whence she could descry a little, but
not much, of the stir near the gates.

Dolf returned once or twice to report various successes, including the
capture of General Wrede, and, towards nine o'clock (for they are early
people), numbers of men running through the streets, waving their hats
and shouting, proclaimed the day to be won by the Tyrolese.

In consequence of a letter which Martin Teimer had compelled General
Kinkel to write to the Bavarian commander, General Wrede himself,
accompanied by a French officer, had ridden to the gates, with so
strong a guard, that the Tyrolese, considering them aggressors, drove
them back with great loss, and took the General and his companion
prisoners. The discomfited fugitives carried back to their lines such
a formidable account of the strength and fury of the Tyrolese, that
the French and Bavarians were thrown into the greatest consternation,
especially the latter, who had lost their principal officer.

Martin Teimer, accompanied by Baron Taxis and Atzwanger, the leader
of the armed burghers, and also by several Tyrolese leaders, repaired
to the French lines, where they were courteously received by Colonel
Bisson, who protested he intended no injury to the town, and merely
wished to carry his troops unmolested to Augsburg. He made no
stipulation for the Bavarians. Teimer, inspirited by his capture of
Wrede, would hear of nothing short of the surrender of the whole army,
to which Bisson a little impatiently replied that he would rather
sacrifice every man under his command.

Teimer, without deigning a reply, returned to the Tyrolese, who
immediately opened a deadly fire on the enemy. Their shouts and
impetuosity so petrified the French grenadiers that for a while they
stood motionless without returning a shot. The French officers conjured
Bisson to surrender on honourable terms to Teimer, whom they recalled
for the purpose, and Bisson at length most reluctantly countersigned
the following articles, which the reader may decide whether honourable
or not.

 "In the name of Francis the First, Emperor of Austria, the French and
 Bavarian troops at Steinach and Wiltau, agree to the following terms:--

 "First. That they shall immediately lay down their arms.

 "Second. That the whole body of the eighth division shall surrender to
 the Austrian troops at Schwatz.

 "Third. That any Tyrolese who have been made prisoners shall be set
 free.

 "Fourth. The officers of the French and Bavarian army shall be set
 free, with their swords, baggage, horses, &c., untouched.

 "Given by me for his Royal Highness Archduke John, at Innsbruck, April
 13, 1809, at half-past eight in the forenoon.

                                  "MARTIN TEIMER,
                                  "_Major and Authorized Commissioner_.

 "Countersigned,

          "ARMANCE,
          "VARIN,
          "BISSON,[C]
          "_&c. &c._"

The prisoners thus made, were marched to Schwatz, and thence to
Salzburg, under the escort of _women_; as men could not be spared for
the occasion. The success of this day (achieved before nine o'clock in
the morning) was undoubtedly mainly owing to Martin Teimer; as General
Chastelar, though pushing on from Sterzing, did not arrive in time
to be of any use. Buonaparte, however, provoked at the issue of the
day, and not stooping to such ignoble prey, at present, as Tyrolean
innkeepers and tobacconists, issued an act of outlawry against "the
person named Chastelar, styling himself a general in the Austrian
service," charging him (without the least ground) with the massacre of
prisoners; and sentencing him, if caught, to be tried by martial law,
and, if found guilty, to be shot in twenty-four hours.

Meanwhile the worthy general was thinking it no scorn to entertain
Hofer and Martin Teimer at his table, and talk over the events of the
day. The Tyrolese are temperate and abstemious to a proverb; but these
mountaineers had fought hard and were hungry; they probably had never
heard the Wise King's injunction, "When thou sittest to eat with a
ruler, consider diligently what is before thee; and put a knife to thy
throat if thou be given to appetite;" and therefore drank the sweet and
ate the fat with relish that was too little disguised to escape the
satirical notice of certain junior officers, by whom it was afterwards
turned against them. After all, they ate and drank but moderately, and
were much fuller of their success than their dinner; yet they spoke
but moderately too, and in simple phrase; and their censors decided
them to be phlegmatic. The good-natured Chastelar pushed the wine
towards them and bade them drink to the Emperor.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX.

HOME.


Anna Hofer was kneeling before the crucifix in the corner of her
kitchen, praying as fervently as if she had been privileged to own
a purer faith; and, with every bead that ran through her fingers,
letting fall a tear far more precious than a pearl of great price. What
opportunity had she had of living under a better dispensation? Romanism
was the only form of Christianity the Tyrolese were acquainted with;
and while, among their invaders, infidelity was rampant, the simplicity
and fervour of their piety made them, as far as in them lay, champions
of the Christian faith.

Anna, then, knelt before the crucifix, wrestling in prayer, with groans
and sighings that could not be uttered. Judge of her revulsion of
feeling, when a beloved voice close to her said, "Anna!"

"Oh, my good man, is't thou?" And she cast herself into his arms.
"What, then! is the war over, husband?"

"Dearest woman, no! But we have a little breathing space; for a little
while our enemies are scattered, and the men of Tyrol too. As soon as
they make head again, we shall swarm about them like bees. Meanwhile,
we must plough, and we must sow."

"I _have_ sown our field, Anderl. It was ploughed already."

"Dear wife--" and he kissed her. "How hast thou sown it?"

"That which was buckwheat, with barley and rye; and that which was
barley and rye, with buckwheat."

"Right. Where's Theresa?"

"Looking after the horse. The children are keeping the cows, goats, and
sheep. Here comes Theresa."

Theresa flew up to her father, and embraced him; then overwhelmed him
with a thousand questions.

"One at a time will last the longer," said he; and drawing her to his
knee, with his wife close beside him, he rehearsed to them in detail
what has here been recounted more briefly; interjecting warm praise of
Chastelar, Hormayr, and Martin Teimer.

"See here," continued he, pulling forth a paper, "what a beautiful
letter our dear Emperor has written us:--

"'My dear and faithful Tyrolese!'--"

--"No! does our Franzel really say so?" interrupted Anna, eagerly
leaning over his shoulder, to satisfy herself. "How beautifully
expressed! A petty commandant, look you, would hardly be so affable!"--

"'My dear and faithful Tyrolese! Since the sacrifices which the
unfortunate year 1805 compelled me to make, when I was obliged to
separate from you, my heart has been constantly with you, my honest,
affectionate children!'"--

"_That_'s warm from the heart, anyhow!" muttered Anna.

"'As a last proof of my affection, I stipulated for the preservation
of your Constitution; and it gave me the greatest pain to see
this--this'"--

"Institution," suggested Theresa.

"No, nonsense--'This stipulation disregarded, which I had made for your
advantage; but, alas! at that time I was unable to assist you, and
could only lament your fate in private.'"--

"Poor dear man! doubtless it cost him many a secret tear," interjected
Anna.

"'When a new cause again obliged me to draw my sword, my first thought
was to become again your father. An army was put in motion to effect
your deliverance; but before it could meet our common enemy, you had by
your gallantry struck a decisive blow, and proved to the whole world,
as well as myself, what you are ready to do to become again a part of
that kingdom under which for centuries past you have lived contented
and happy--'"

"Beautiful, beautiful!" ejaculated Anna. "What golden words!"

"There's some more, mother," said Theresa.

"'Your efforts have touched my heart--I know your courage; I am ready
to meet all your wishes, and to count you amongst the best and most
faithful subjects in the Austrian dominions. It will be my earnest
endeavour to prevent our being again separated: millions, who were
long your brothers, will be eager to draw their swords in the cause!
I trust, therefore, in you; and you may rely on me. So, by God's
assistance, Austria and the Tyrol will be again united as they were in
former years.

                                                       "'FRANCIS.

  "'SCHARDING, _April 18, 1809_.'"

"Dear, dear, dear, only think of an emperor like him to write in that
way to a poor man like thee, Anderl," said Anna.

"Not to me in particular," said Hofer; "to all my weapon-brothers as
well."

"At any rate, he could not speak more fair, nor more handsome--dear
Franzel! Do let me look close at his letter with my very own eyes. Why,
now, the dear Emperor spells Tyrol with two l's, as you do, Anderl,
sometimes; but he writes a deal better," nudging him with her elbow.

"As an emperor is likely to do," said Hofer, his good white teeth
gleaming right merrily through his black beard. "Why, now, I copied
that letter myself, and it's my own handwriting: so a precious one you
are to have a cut at me!"

"You? Why, you told me it was the Emperor's!"

"Aye, his words, but not his penmanship. Why, think you there was a man
of us all that would not get a copy of it, if he could?"

"Oh well, I thought his hand wondrous like thine, man. Don't you
believe you took me in! Why, didn't I find out the two l's?"

"Aye, but you thought them the emperor's!"

"Never mind! the sense is the thing. This letter deserves to be framed
and glazed; aye, framed in gold: and since we can't afford that, I'll
paste it against the wall."

"Well, that's not a bad notion. Is dinner ready?"

"Yes, father," said Theresa, slipping from his knee, and hastening to
spread the table. "You've dined with a many strange people, I suppose,
since you went away."

"That have I, girl,--with General Chastelar and Baron Hormayr; but
great folks eat so fast and talk so fast, there's no taking one's
comfort. They snatch away your plate before 'tis empty, bob a dish
under your nose, and whisk it off if you look at it twice before you
help yourself."

"A good way of having a dinner for next day," said Anna, laughing.

"Aye, aye; and when I and the men of Passeyr got to Botzen, where
Baron Hormayr and all his staff came out to receive us with honour, he
uncovering his head and letting his hair blow about in the wind,--I
warrant you, General Marschall refused to sit down to table with a
humble man like me; just as if a guest wasn't good enough for him that
was good enough for Hormayr!"

"Well! to think of that!" cried Anna indignantly. "I hope the Baron
told him a piece of his mind."

"No, no; he had too much temper and sense," said Hofer. "He just made
a little grimace to me behind his back, and I took no umbrage; only it
showed the nature of the man."

"What a good thing Baron Hormayr is not of his sort," said Theresa.

"Oh, the general has his merits, after all," said Hofer, stroking his
beard. "He is a good fighting man, but his pride is so great, that not
even his own soldiers like him. See, dear women, how evil a thing pride
is."

"And what is being done now, Anderl?"

"Much. The regular troops are assisting the Tyrolese to hem in the
enemy in the Lower Tyrol. The _landsturm_ from Meran and the Vintsghaw
are advancing on the right side of the Etsch; and those of Etsch and
Fleims are keeping the passes of Rochetta and Bucco di Vela. Baron
Hormayr and Martin Teimer want General Chastelar to attack the enemy in
the Lower Tyrol at once; but he's too slow, too slow. By not coming up
in time, he let us take Innsbruck without him: and Martin Teimer won
all the glory of making Bisson and Wrede lay down their arms."

"Martin Teimer is no favourite of mine," said Anna, pouring out the
porridge.

"Ah, he has done good service, nevertheless. General Chastelar finds
fault with our training, calls us round-shouldered, and who knows
what?--and wants to drill us a little. He won't be able to turn a
wild lark into a piping bulfinch, though, it's my opinion. As long
as we beat the enemy, what does it signify how we do it? He is doing
real good service, however, by giving muskets to those who have no
fire-arms, but only spears and such like of their own manufacture. Now,
then, where are the children?"

Theresa went to the door to give a jödel, which would answer the
purpose of a dinner-bell; but, changing her purpose, returned, saying,
"Father, here is a young, olive-coloured man, who looks something like
a soldier, coming up to the house; in quest, apparently, of you."

Almost at the same instant, the young man stepped in, taking off his
cap and saluting Hofer in a foreign accent as Signor Andrea.

"_Come sta?_" returned Hofer, who rather piqued himself on a smattering
of Italian. "_Sedete voi. Andiamo pranzare--Fate lo stesso._"

"_Mille grazie_," returned the youth, who, however, preferred his own
German to Hofer's Italian. "The Signor Barone has sent me, Giuseppe
Eisenstecken, with the desire you will accept me as adjutant."

"What want have I of an adjutant?" inquired the Sandwirth. "What are
you to do?"

"_Che vi piace_," returned Giuseppe, spreading out his hands; "I am
quite at your service."

"But, my good lad, I don't want your services; so where's the good?"

Giuseppe raised his eyebrows; then replied, "A little training, the
Signor Barone thought, would be desirable for your men, and some small
knowledge of tactics for their chief."

"Ah, my dear youth, you mean to flatten our backs, I suppose, and turn
out our toes; but when you have lived as long in a mountainous country
as I have, you will find it more convenient, clambering about among the
crags, to round your shoulders and turn your toes in. Meanwhile, do as
we do--_nulla ceremonia!_--dine first, and talk afterwards. One thing
at a time will last the longer."

The young adjutant looked at first as if he hardly knew how to take
this; but at the same instant, three rosy children ran in and flew
into their father's arms. While Hofer was embracing and kissing them,
Giuseppe looked on with some sympathy; then, drawing a stool towards
the table, he prepared to accept the Sandwirth's invitation.

"So Baron Hormayr sent you to me?" said Hofer presently. "Well, I
wonder he said nothing about you when I saw him."

"He has written," said Giuseppe, taking a note out of his cap.

"Why didn't you tell me that before?" said Hofer. "Were you keeping it
for dessert?"

"You said one thing at a time would last the longer."

Hofer smiled, as he opened the note. "Well," said he, when he had read
it; "it seems I had hardly need to come home. Here am I wanted again at
head-quarters, to receive orders for immediate action. We must put off
our drilling, my good friend, till another time. Why is this recall?"

"Since you left, we have received news of the Archduke John's having
won a brilliant victory at Sacile."

"Aha! Our beloved _Hannes_! Heaven be praised, I am ready to return
immediately to the camp."

"Immediately?" said his wife, a little startled.

"Not till I have dined and had an hour's sleep."

"One thing at a time will last the longer, Signor Andrea."

"Just so, Signor Giuseppe. But come, tell me about our Hannes' victory."

"He defeated Eugene Beauharnois on the 15th, and compelled him to
retire to Caldiero. That is all I know."

"Hum! Not even how many men were slain?"

"No. The news had but just arrived."

"Humph!"

"You seem to have a good many targets."

"Ah, those are my coats of arms," said the Sandwirth, supping his
porridge.

"They seem to have been hit in the bull's eye pretty often."

"Pretty often."

"By you?"

"By me."

"At how many paces?"

"Three hundred."

"You must be a pretty good marksman."

"Goodish; there are plenty as good or better in the Tyrol. Did you hear
that verse one of our men made the other day? General Marschall had
observed that we only beat the enemy by chance. On which, our youngster
observed--

  "''Tis but by chance,' doth Marschall say,
  'The Tyrolese have won the day.'
  What then? I'd rather win by chance
  Than, with much skill, be beat by France!

For where's the good of tactics, you know, master Giuseppe, if they
that have them are beat by the unlearned?"

Giuseppe seemed engrossed in the merits of his dinner. "I should like
to see you fire at a mark, Signor Andrea," said he at length.

"Pooh, pooh! we have other things in hand, brother. The way is long and
steep. Are we going to be sent into the south, think you?"

"To Trent, I conclude, but I only conjecture."

Hofer asked a few more questions, but he was not a great talker at
meal-times, though he ate with great moderation. As soon as dinner was
ended, he took his hour's sleep, woke up fresh and strong, and told his
new adjutant he was ready for the journey.

At every house or village they passed, he found messengers to despatch
to the men in the fields and call them back from their husbandry to
resume their rifles. These came running along after him, some swinging
their coats on as they ran, others tightening their belts, others with
their weapons not slung but in their hands; all cheerfully obeying the
summons without murmuring at being disappointed of their rest.

On Hofer's arrival at the camp, General Chastelar instantly appointed
him to the command of the right wing, consisting of the men of Passeyr
and of Etschthal. Almost at the same moment, expresses arrived to
announce the disorderly retreat of the French and Bavarians on the news
of the Archduke's victory, and of their destroying the bridges of Lavis
and Lorenzen.

"What are we to do, Hofer, without these bridges?" said the General.

"I must think," said Hofer.

He thought so long, that Hormayr impatiently whispered to Chastelar,
"He is falling asleep--what a dunderhead he is!"

But the good man was thinking to the purpose; and, knowing the ground
and the men who were on it, he sat down and wrote two or three short
notes, and gave them to the General, saying:

"If you will send them, these will do."

"Had you not better go yourself?" put in Baron Hormayr.

"Why?" said the Sandwirth. "I cannot be in two places at once. If I
were at Lavis, I could not be at Lorenzen. These will do."

"Perhaps they will," muttered the General to the Baron, who shrugged
his shoulders. "See the notes sent off."

"He knows when he's in good quarters, I believe," said Hormayr aside,
as he passed the notes to his inferior officer.

But others, of less note than a Roman centurion, may have moral force
enough to be able to say to one man go, and he goeth; to another come,
and he cometh; to another, do this, and he doeth it.

Chastelar showed a vague sense of this when he replied in an equally
low tone to Hormayr, "It matters little--his _name_ will be enough."

How was it that that name came to be enough? The name of another poor,
honest man would not have done as well.

On the following day, the 22d of April, the enemy evacuated Trent
without firing a shot; and Hormayr took possession of the town the same
evening.

The ancient city of Trent! Few need to be reminded of the famous
Council of purple cardinals, princely bishops, mitred abbots, sandalled
monks, and learned doctors, assembled there by Charles the Fifth, and
prolonging their sitting for eighteen long years.

"What a market," exclaims a writer, warming with his subject, "the city
must then have had!--what cooks!--what convoys of sleek mules laden
with luxuries!--and how, in their distant and regretted residences, all
the old housekeepers of those perplexed and provoked absentees must
have busied themselves in the preparation of savouries, and potted
meats, dried fruits, and delicate conserves, and in the regular and
never-failing despatch of supplies from the well-stored cellars."

Trent is now said to be as dissolute a little capital as any in Europe.
The simplicity of ancient manners, if it ever did exist there, is no
longer to be found. Even the characteristic honesty of the Tyrolese has
disappeared, and extortion and cheatery are of common occurrence.

This was not the locality Hofer would willingly choose for his
_landsturm_. Fortunately, they were not long exposed to its influence.
On the 24th, General Chastelar advanced towards Trent, while Hofer took
possession of the ground between Trent and Roveredo. On the same day,
Chastelar, after his fatiguing march, was drawn into action by Baraguay
d'Hilliers, who, with a superior force, was victorious, but reaped
no advantage from it. He had already abandoned Trent, and he now,
immediately after the battle, forsook Roveredo, and quitted the country
entirely.

Chastelar had scarcely taken up his quarters in Roveredo, when he heard
of the Austrians' reverses in Germany and Italy. The north of the Tyrol
was now left deserted, at the mercy of the enemy; and he resolved
immediately to return to it; invited thereto by a note written by the
Archduke John in pencil on his knee, from the battle-field.

"Do not let our misfortunes make you uneasy. We have done our duty, and
will defend the Tyrol to the last drop of our blood.

                                                       "JOHN.

  "30th April."

Thus ended this eventful month.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER X.

GUERILLA WARFARE.


The rifles were soon in full action again. In the course of a few days
not a single town in the Tyrol remained in the occupation of the French
but Kufstein.

Then came a reverse. The Austrians under Chastelar were defeated
at Worgl. This was on the 13th of May; and six days afterwards the
Bavarians burned Schwatz; while the flames of seventeen other towns and
villages made the heavens appear a vast sea of fire.

In a certain mountain-pass several men were vigorously felling down
enormous larch-trees, evidently for purposes of warfare, under the
direction of Father Joachim, who was zealously instructing them where
to place the trees with most effect; how to intermix them with huge
masses of rock, filling up the interstices with earth and brushwood;
and how to secure the whole mass from toppling over till the right
moment, by means of cords and chains. In the midst of this exciting
work a little boy came trotting up to the good Capuchin.

"Father bade me find you," said he, panting, and looking up at him with
his clear, soft, black eyes, "and tell you and the men you are wanted."

"What! to fight?"

"Father says the enemy are to be found at Berg Isel. He and Hofer and
Teimer will all meet there, and they want you all to join them."

"We will come!"

And away ran little Speckbacher, sitting down and sliding down the
mountain-side wherever it was not too rough, and getting on with
amazing celerity. Many of the men laughed, and followed his example.

The child led the way, and an hour's fast walking brought them within
earshot of the rifles, the continual report of which showed that the
engagement had begun. It was a severe and fatal one; but the loss
was almost entirely on the side of the enemy, who were triumphantly
defeated.

Little Anderl again hovered about, to see the issue of the fight. He
was now a regular and accredited messenger among the Tyrolese, and
was allowed by his mother to go forth and bring her tidings of his
father, on condition of his keeping as much out of danger as he could
reasonably be expected to do.

On the present occasion, he had climbed a tree at some distance, and
out of the direction of the firing, from whence he got a good general
idea of the success of the engagement, without being close enough
to see the dreadful features of its details. He now slid down from
his perch, but, instead of pursuing his father, paused when he had
run a little way; and after watching the retiring foemen till they
disappeared, prepared to run home and tell his mother. A squall of wind
and rain had come on, and a flock of sheep rushed wildly past him.

Just then, he heard a groan close by him; and, looking round, saw a
Bavarian soldier who had been shot down among the long coarse grass and
underwood. The poor young fellow did not look above twenty; he had a
boyish, simple face; his leg was bleeding fast, and he had turned very
white.

"Even such a little boy as I am could kill that Bavarian," thought
Anderl; "but I could not have the heart to do it, even if the Sandwirth
had not said we must never hit a man when he is down.--Are you in much
pain?" said he, approaching him with pity.

"I'm bleeding to death, I think," said the Bavarian; "will you help me,
you little chap? or are you going to hurt me?"

"Oh, no! Shall I tie up your leg with your handkerchief? Mother would
do it better, but I won't hurt you, if I can help it."

"Thanks, thanks! Oh, get me some water!"

Anderl knew where there was a spring, and he ran and brought some in
his hat.

"It is raining very hard," said he, "and there is shelter not far off:
do you think you can crawl to it?"

"Well, I'll try--it's so forlorn to be left to die here. You're not
taking me to people that will knock me on the head?" added he quickly.

"Oh, no! Not to any people at all, only to a shepherd's deserted hut
scooped out of the rock. Edge yourself along this way, on your elbow
and the side that isn't bleeding. I know it will hurt you, but you
mustn't mind that."

Following the advice and guidance of the humane little boy, the young
Bavarian, with a good deal of wincing, and some additional effusion
of blood, wormed himself along to the rude little cavity which Anderl
had dignified by the name of a hut. It contained, however, a rough bed
of fir branches, a stool and table of rude construction, and a little
hidden store of rye-cakes and cheese.

"And now," said Anderl, after having good-naturedly settled him on the
rustic couch, and put the food within his reach, "I'll fetch you some
water; and then I must leave you, or my mother will fancy I've come to
harm."

"I hope the owner of the hut will not return, though," said the
Bavarian wistfully. "You couldn't get me a musket, could you? I dare
say mine is down among the grass."

"Why, now, how can you expect it?" said the boy. "Here have I had mercy
on you, our enemy; and you want me to give you the means of shooting
one of my friends!"

"But I'm so defenceless," suggested the Bavarian.

"Your safety lies in that," said Anderl. "If any of our men should come
and be unexpectedly saluted by you with a shot, of course he would be
tempted to return your fire pretty effectually; but if he finds you
lying helpless as I did, he will have compassion; because the Sandwirth
told us this very morning, that none but a coward would harm a fallen
foe."

"Come, that's one comfort," said the young soldier. "Must you go?"

"Aye, that I must, but I'll come and look after you in a day or two, if
I can."

"Oh! I may be dead before that."

"Why, your leg has left off bleeding already, and you have plenty to
eat! What have you to do but to lie still and get well? I don't think
you are very brave!"

This unexpected rebuke made the colour mount in the young Bavarian's
face; and Anderl, after looking at him for a moment, turned away; and
taking a beechen bowl from a nail in the wall, sallied forth to the
spring and filled it to the brim with water. "There, now," said he,
smiling, as he placed it beside the soldier, "do you feel all over
red-hot coals?"

"No; what do you mean?"

"Why, Father Joachim says, 'If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst, give him drink; for in so doing, thou shalt heap coals of fire
on his head.'"

"Why, _I_ am not your enemy, you little boy! What harm have we ever
done one another?"

"I've done _you_ none, certainly; but you have been killing my friends;
and would gladly have killed my father!"

"Who is your father?"

"I must not tell you that. However, I may tell you that he is--oh, such
a brave man! and so good! Every one loves him."

"Hofer, I suppose?"

"No, not Hofer; but I must not tell you any more, so now good bye.
I don't think any one will come near you--unless it should be the
hill-sprite."

"Who is the hill-sprite?"

"Well, I can't justly say; but he haunts the hill-top; and when the
herdsmen have gone down into the valley for winter, he takes possession
of one of their deserted châlets,--to be more snug and comfortable, I
suppose, while nobody else wants it; and, sometimes, when a herdsman
has gone back again for something he has forgotten, he has found the
hill-sprite already settling himself in the châlet, and arranging his
ghostly pans and pails."

"Hum! And are you going to leave me to the mercy of this hill-sprite?"

"Oh, he won't hurt you. You got here first; and if he looks in and sees
you, he'll go away. Shall you be frightened?"

"That depends. If he wears a green jacket and red sash, and carries a
rifle over his shoulder, very likely I shall be."

"Not if he does not point it at _you_. Besides, it wouldn't go off."

"I shan't understand his language."

"Why, you understand _mine_. But he doesn't talk at all, only makes a
dismal noise, and keeps smiting his hands. I advise you to say your
prayers, and then you won't think of him any more."

Away went Anderl, with a very unfavourable impression of Bavarian
courage. Meanwhile, the wounded soldier felt very lonely without his
little companion; and weak from the loss of blood. A good deal of what
courage he had, had certainly ebbed away with it; for he was presently
sadly scared by a sudden, rushing, unaccountable sound of many small
feet, which he thought must be those of a legion of hill-sprites rather
than of one.

It only proceeded, however, from the flock of sheep, who, having
remained under the hill while the spring storm lasted, were now
returning to the sweet short grass higher up.

A couple of days afterwards, Anderl, who had often thought of the
Bavarian, made up a little packet of cakes and cheese, and set off on a
walk of several miles to see after him.

                "The gate was there, but not the lad!"

Anderl looked about, but could find nothing of him. The food was eaten,
and he was gone.

It was best for all parties that he should have made off. After a
night's good sleep, he had awoke sufficiently refreshed to make a
hearty breakfast of what would have fed a temperate Tyrolese for two
or three days; and then, examining his wound, he found himself able to
bind it up sufficiently well to admit of his moving slowly, with a good
deal of limping.

He was very desirous of going down the ravine, to hunt for his musket,
but hardly felt equal to it; and the sound of men's voices among the
trees decided him on keeping on his present level, and making off as
fast as he could.

Fear enabled him to do this better than he would otherwise have thought
possible; and he made considerable progress along the mountain-side,
till he began to be uncertain of his bearings, and to fear that he
might be penetrating into the enemy's country instead of getting out
of it. Besides, he was by this time very tired and very hungry; and it
was therefore with considerable though not unmixed satisfaction that
he descried a lone hut. Though lonely, it might not be unoccupied;
therefore, he approached it with extreme caution.

On close investigation, however, there appeared no signs of life.
Made bold by hunger, he raised the latch; went in and found the hut
empty--empty of inhabitants, that is, but not of stock; for it appeared
to be a kind of little shop or store, containing medicines for man,
horse, and cow; cheap crockery and cutlery; sieves, tubs, and pails;
household and agricultural implements; and a few rolls of green
cloth, canvas, and calico; such goods as the peasantry were likely
to want during the long winter months, without finding it convenient
to go to a town for them. Every article was ticketed with the price;
there was a till for the money, and a book wherein to enter what had
been purchased. These good, honest people could rely upon not being
defrauded by one another!

It struck the Bavarian; though not so much as it would strike us. He
opened the till; there was a little heap of kreutzers in it,--and shut
it up again. He looked into the ledger, and read such entries as
these--

  "Walter Landauer; a Dutch hoe (so many kreutzers).
   Adolf Winkel, three yds. green cloth.
   Madeline Weiss, 2 yds. scarlet ribbon.
      Ditto.       1 oz. coarse white thread.
      Ditto.       1 small hair sieve.
   Jerome Brinkel, a brush of hog's hair bristles."

and so forth.

The Bavarian began to look about for something to eat. He found
unroasted coffee in the berry, tar, turpentine, oil, black and yellow
paint, and cobbler's wax; none of which articles, separately or
conjointly, promised a very desirable repast, even if there were a fire
lighted by which to cook them. At length he came to a small canister
of sugar-plums and poured its contents into his pocket, that his mouth
might not be altogether unemployed, if he could find nothing better to
fill it.

Just then he heard a loud exclamation of surprise; and, with a guilty
start, he turned about and met the great, round, wondering eyes of a
stout, thickset girl, who looked as if she were not quite sure of his
not being the hill-sprite.

His start, and the uniform he wore, seemed to undeceive her; for she
accosted him with an ejaculation tantamount to

"Well, I'm sure!--"

"Pretty maiden, does this shop belong to you?" said the Bavarian.

"No more than it does to you!" said she, planting herself boldly in the
door-way. "How durst you come here?"

"I am a wounded man--don't you see?" (pointing to his bandage) "and a
stranger. Women always have pity on the unfortunate."

"How do I know you're unfortunate? You are a thief! you were eating
Hans Steffan's sugar-plums!"

"Because I was starving."

"Were you?" relenting a little.

"I can't think what I shall do."

"What do you want to do?"

"To get out of the Tyrol as quick as I can."

"You may do that in a few hours, if you look sharp."

"But I am wounded, and cannot walk fast."

"Humph--poor fellow! And you are hungry?"

"As a hunter."

"Humph!--Well,--here's some bread and cheese I was carrying to my
father; you can have it, and I will fetch him some more. And now
I advise you to be off as fast as you can--_I_ will pay for the
sugar-plums. That is, supposing you have no money."

"Not a kreutzer."

"Well; here are a couple of kreutzers for you. Now, off."

"Which way?"

"Right towards that old tower on the distant hill. When you reach it
you will get a distant view of Innsbruck, which of course you will keep
clear of, as we have re-taken it!"

"Have you!"

"That have we. Now depart."

"Gracious maiden, permit me--" He saluted her on the cheek.

She watched him down the hill, and then turned on her heel, with an
ejaculatory "Humph!--what manners!"

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI.

TYROLESE COURTSHIP.


A young man is busily examining the water-worn rocks along the edge
of a Tyrolese stream. Now and then he strikes them with a large
sledge-hammer, eagerly snatches up something alive, and pops it into a
basket. A wild _jödel_ from a mountain-side, half a mile off, makes him
look up, and discovers the face of our old, but not very respectable,
acquaintance, Franz.

The wild cry was uttered by a girl, who, in course of time, drew near
him, knitting as she came along; for a Tyrolese woman never is idle.

"What are you about there, Franz?"

"Can't you see, Theresa? Look at that nice basket of fish."

"How can you be about such nonsense, when every man deserving the name
of a man is up in arms? I am quite ashamed of you!"

"Well, Theresa, you are not over-polite; but don't you know that some
must plough, and some must sow, and some must handle the mattock and
hoe?"

"Well, all I can say is, I think it very contemptible of you!"

"Why, now, Theresa, I call that very unkind! Do you know I was catching
these smelts on purpose for you?"

"I would not give a pin for them; I am not dainty in my eating, and if
I were, we have plenty of good trout in the Passeyr, to be caught at
our own door."

"These would fetch a good price in Innsbruck market, I can tell you!"

"Then you had better carry them to Innsbruck market. Only, take care
none of our Passeyrers ask you where you have been these three days."

"Why, Theresa, how bitter you are! You've never had a civil word to say
to me since I beat Rudolf at bowls."

"_You?_ Ha, ha, ha!"

"I _did_, though!"

"Very likely you might; but I have forgotten all about it. People that
attend to nothing but hammering stones for smelts, and playing bowls
and ninepins, are likely to excel in such things."

"I do attend to a precious lot of things besides--"

"What? Oh, looking after the cows, and smuggling brandy, and selling
bad horses for good ones--well, you do all that, I allow."

Franz did not answer her for a few minutes, but leapt actively from
rock to rock along the stream; darting here and there on a smelt, and
coming back with his hands full.

"There!" said he, throwing them into the basket; "perhaps your mother
will accept them of me, if you won't; so I'll carry them to her, and we
can walk along together. I've a word or two to say to you."

"What is it?" said Theresa, pursuing her knitting, and stepping out at
a good pace.

"All that you said just now," rejoined he, after a short silence,
"about my getting brandy, and selling horses, and looking after
cows,--to which you might have added doctoring them when ill,--is true
enough, Theresa; and what is more, it has put a goodish bit of money
into my pocket."

"Very likely," said Theresa; "but what of that? Money is not the thing
of most consequence in the world."

"Well, _I_ almost think it is."

"It is of much consequence, certainly, Franz, in _this_ way, I grant
you,--the way it is employed,--whether good or evil. If it enables (and
inclines) you to be generous and helpful to your poor old blind mother,
and your hard-working sister, it is an instrument of good; but if you
only hide it in a hole, it is of no good at all; and if you spend it
in betting and drinking, it is worse than no good, for it is downright
evil."

"All that is very well to say,"--began Franz.

"Nothing is very well to say, unless it be true," interrupted Theresa.

"But it's quite certain," continued Franz, "that money is a real good,
whether or no: and for this plain reason--that it gives you _power_."

"Power of some sort," said Theresa.

"Almost endless power," returned Franz, warming with his subject. "Why,
now, how could Buonaparte carry on this war without money?"

"Without wit, rather," said Theresa. "I never heard that he was very
rich to start with, but quite the reverse; the thing was, _he had
a clever head, and made use of it_. He was very pains-taking, very
resolute; and that has made him so powerful; not money."

"It has put him in possession of money, without which he could not pay
his troops," argued Franz; "and if they were not paid, they would not
fight for him."

"Not they! I believe you there," said Theresa. "They have not the
motives for fighting that we poor Tyrolese have; and that is why we so
often beat them."

"Well, but, Theresa, when I began to speak about money, I did not
mean to get into this long argument. What I was going to tell
you,--(in confidence, you know,)--is that I've a goodish bit of money
underground, in a pot--"

"Then, there it will rot!"

"No, it won't! It will increase!"

"What! like a grain of corn? Franz, I wonder how you can tell such
stories!"

"I didn't say like corn. It will increase, because I shall put more to
it."

"Oh! that's one way--"

"Yes, and that one way will suffice. Why should we try a dozen roads,
when one leads to the mill? Now, Theresa, listen to me. I've had a
dream--"

"Humph!"

"And I dreamed that I was in a certain spot, which I shall not now
disclose; and that I saw a cloud of golden dollars floating in the air
before me, just out of my reach--"

"I should think so!"

"Why, that's the beauty of it!" cried Franz, highly excited.

"Is it?" said Theresa, looking mystified.

"Yes; because it's a known thing among the wise ones, that when gold
pieces glitter before you in that way in the air, the spot they hover
over is where hidden treasure is to be found."

"Who are the 'wise ones?'"

"Oh, there are many old people that can tell about dreams."

"A good many," said Theresa, dryly. "Well, Franz, I hope you won't go
wasting your time digging for this hid treasure. You had much better
hoe potatoes."

"I don't think so," said Franz; "and I hope you won't think so, if I
tell you my motive."

"What motive?" said Theresa.

"That I may be rich enough to marry you."

Theresa turned very red, and then burst out laughing.

"Franz," said she, "don't deceive yourself about that, for _I'll_ not
deceive you! I would not marry you if you were made of money. I must
have a husband of quite another sort--"

"Rudolf, in short," cried Franz, angrily.

"We are not talking of Rudolf," returned Theresa, turning yet redder.
"There are some people that never can believe you don't like them,
without it's being the fault of somebody else, instead of their own. If
I had never seen any other young man in the world, Franz, I should not
choose to marry you."

"Oh, come, now, Theresa!--"

"It's the truth! You have not those qualities which I love."

"What are those qualities?" said Franz, very crustily.

"Spirit; self-denial; temperance; a modest opinion of yourself;
generosity; truth; charitable feelings towards others."

"I don't believe there's a fellow with all you want under the sun,"
said Franz, aiming a stone at that luminary. "If you'd mentioned one
thing, I might have tried to acquire it for your sake; but such a lot
of them,--no, thank you! the reward wouldn't be worth the trouble: and
besides, I know I could not accomplish it; so there's no use in trying."

"But, Franz, what a bad case you make out for yourself, if you own you
are deficient in all these things."

"I'm not! I've as many of them as anybody else; but what you want is
perfection, and that's what's not to be found. You may _fancy_ you
find it, if a fellow pleases you in something else,--white teeth, or
black eyes, or a smart jacket, or nobody knows what; but he won't
_be_ perfection any the more for all that. And I'm just as honest and
fair-dealing as other people, and just as much liked, and not at all
intemperate; and as for spirit,--ho! if Rudolf stood here between me
and the edge of the cliff this minute, wouldn't I tip him over it,
that's all!"

"Franz, you think to intimidate me, but you only fill me with disgust.
What good could you hope to reap by such a dreadful piece of cruelty?
On the contrary, nothing would ever prosper in your hands afterwards.
Do you remember those two young men, both in love with the same girl,
who went out together one day to take an eagle's nest? One returned,
the other did not: the fact was, one had let down his companion from
the top of the cliff to the nest, and then drawn up the rope, and left
him to starve, or be torn to pieces by the parent-birds. Think what a
miserable end he himself came to afterwards!"

"Ah, there's no knowing what a fellow may be driven to, when he's
jealous," said Franz, after a pause--"It's best not to make him
desperate."

"He had better not allow himself to become desperate."

"Well, Theresa, here we come to two paths,--one leads to the Wirthhaus,
the other does not; which shall I take?"

"Whichever you like; it is quite indifferent to me. The path is yours
as much as mine."

"If I take the path to the Wirthhaus, I shall still try and hope to
make myself agreeable to you. If I take the path to the left, I shall
renounce you for ever!"

"You had better, then, take the path to the left."

"Fish and all?" holding the basket a little towards her, but as if his
elbow were tied to his side.

"Fish and all," said Theresa, without intermitting her knitting.

"Then farewell, Theresa, for ever!" cried Franz, in a tone intended
to be fiercely tragic. "You have had your last chance of me!" And
shouldering his smelts, he strode off.

He was in a very tempestuous state of mind; and many things Theresa had
said had cut him more deeply than she thought; but to no good purpose.
When a stone came tumbling upon him from the mountain-top, he shook his
fist savagely, and muttered, "Even the little people" (_i. e._ fairies)
"are against me!"--and then, considering that if he provoked them, they
might lead him a weary dance after the hidden treasure, he muttered a
spell supposed to have a propitiating effect.

As the pass widened, he beheld from the height on which he stood,
Innsbruck, white and nest-like, basking in the valley afar off, and
turned in his mind whether it were worth his while to carry thither the
fish we have called smelts for want of an English name for them.

"But no," thought he, "the Sandwirth is again in the town, and I don't
care to see him just now, Theresa thinks his luck uppermost, I fancy,
and believes he will be made a great general or governor, and that
he will marry her to Rudolf, and make him a great man too. She has
her own dreams, though she laughs at mine. No, I'll not go; some of
my speaking-acquaintance might put the saucy question she spitefully
suggested; and even if I got a zwanziger or more for my smelts, it
would be very great trouble for very little money. My time will be much
better and more pleasantly employed in digging for the pot of gold; for
when I've got that, I may pay zwanzigers for smelts myself, if I like;
and meantime, I'll sup on those I've caught myself, and eat them with
plenty of brown bread and butter--thin brown bread and thick yellow
butter--as yellow as a cowslip! aye, that's it!"

Rejoicing that Theresa had not accepted the smelts, since she had not
accepted himself, this worthy son of Tyrol wended his way home. How he
would have licked his lips if he had been told the story related by
Bridel, of that golden age when cows were so large and yielded such
abundance of milk, that they were milked into reservoirs or ponds,
from which the cream was afterwards skimmed by a man in a boat, (a
butter-boat, of course!) which boat, once upsetting, the man could not
be found for a long time afterwards, till, at length, his body was
discovered sticking in the immense mass of cream, like a smothered fly!

Before Franz reached home, he encountered Lenora in the cow-pastures.
She was knitting with all her might, which did not hinder her eyes
from roving over hill and valley, and noting the smallest movement
within their range. Consequently, she soon espied her brother, whom
she saluted with a shrill _jödel_ that let him know he was recognised;
otherwise he would gladly have gone a little out of his way to escape
the interview, as she was one of those who not only do their own duties
vigorously, but insist on other people doing theirs.

"Come here, Franz," cried she, as soon as he drew near. "You have not
done a stroke of work to-day. To-morrow you must look after the stock."

"Well, the day after to-morrow, I will."

"Why not to-morrow? I want to take my mother to the shrine of St.
Kummernitz, to try if it will do her eyes any good, and I can't look
after her and the cows too."

"But there's going to be a peasant-play, to-morrow,--Joseph and his
Brethren, and I'm wanted to play one of the brethren."

"Truly, I think there might be a better time of year than this for a
peasant-play, when we are short of hands at every kind of work. Who has
proposed such nonsense?"

"Leopold Strauss is going to marry Bianca Gessner--the play is only
going to be got up by her bridesmaids and a few of the bridegroom's
friends--"

"But you are not one of them, and we are not related to the bride."

"No, but all his friends are gone to fight, and they can't make up the
party without me--"

"Well,--I should think it no great honour to go, under those
circumstances; but you will do as you like. The day after to-morrow,
then, I may rely upon you--"

"You may rely upon me--"

"You promise me faithfully--"

"I promise you faithfully. And, Lenora, I have bought a new ribbon for
my hat: do tie it round for me, there's a good girl--you can tie a bow
so much better than I can--and let me have a nice nosegay."

"Nonsense; you can gather your own nosegay. I shall soon have all your
things to look up for the châlet--the cows' bells must be rubbed up,
and their straps embroidered; you might and ought to have cleaned the
bells and trappings yourself, if it were not for this wedding, which no
way concerns you."

"Who knows, Lenora? I may pick up a rich wife at it--Bianca has six
sisters, who are going to play the six youngest brethren, and I shall
have plenty of opportunities of making myself agreeable!"

"You? Why, you have always talked of meaning to marry Theresa Hofer!"

"She won't suit me," said Franz contemptuously; "I may do better for
myself than that, I fancy."

"I doubt it very much. More likely, you don't suit _her_."

"That just shows how much you know about it. You girls think you may
have anybody you like!--Well, don't let us talk any more of this
nonsense; but come and cook these smelts for supper; and then I'll give
you my hat to trim."

"That's just like one of your givings: here--give me your hat, and do
you drive in the cows."

Franz would have liked her to do _both_, but he knew that was too much
to expect; so he gave her the hat and the basket of fish, and prepared
to collect the herd.

When Lenora reached the cottage, she found rather a pleasant-looking
man talking to her mother.

"Here comes Lenora, I can tell, though I can't see," said he. "Lenora,
I am telling your mother she is better off than I am, for she is only
almost blind, but I am quite; and yet I contrive to find my way by
myself from Meran to Innsbruck every summer, to tune the pianos."

"Ah, there must be a special providence over you, Karl," said Lenora
compassionately, "or you would come to some hurt."

"I know there must be," said he devoutly. "However, now and then, some
good Christian soul meets me and leads me by the hand along some
difficult pass; but they are sent by God."

"You should marry, Karl," said the old woman, "and then your wife would
lead you."

"Who would marry a poor blind fellow like me?" said Karl, rather sadly.
"No, no; I must be content with chance kindnesses."

"Well, you are sure to be welcome, wherever you go," said Lenora
cheerfully. "And you shall have a dainty supper to-night, for Franz has
caught some delicate fish."

"Your mother tells me she's going to St. Kummernitz's shrine, for the
benefit of her eyes," said Karl. "I never heard St. Kummernitz was
particularly famous for that."

"Oh, she's famous for everything," cried the old woman, in a sort of
ecstasy; "dear blessed Saint! she cured me once of the toothache!"

"You're a bit of a heretic, I fear," said Lenora gravely. "You have
been too long at Geneva."

"Well, certainly, this saint of yours seems to have rather an
incredible legend. Your mother tells me, she was a famous opera-dancer
some thousand years or so ago, and was so persecuted by the admiration
her personal charms called forth, that she prayed she might be made
less attractive. On which, rather to her dismay, a beard began to
sprout from her chin, accompanied by a very bushy moustache over her
upper lip, which effectually extinguished the ardour of her lovers; and
though she has been dead so many years, the beard continues to grow to
this day!"

"Well, and what of that?" cried the old woman.

Karl smiled; but the entrance of Franz caused a change in the subject
of conversation.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII.

BERG ISEL.


What a horrible place is Halle! Enveloped in a dense atmosphere of
smoke, the sunbeams vainly endeavour to pour more than a sombre light
into the sooty streets, in which houses, people, and everything else,
have, unavoidably, an air of griminess inseparable from a large
manufacturing town; and the amusing spectacle is too often seen of some
honest fellow walking along in the mistaken belief of having a clean
face, while, all the time, a black has settled on his nose.

It was towards the close of the merry month of May. The struggle at
Berg Isel had taken place on the 26th, and on the following day a man
was to be seen rapidly skirting the mountains that bound Halle to the
north, along the edge of a ravine, in the depths of which brawled an
impetuous torrent. His green coat and red sash might have been those of
any Tyrolese; but his dark beard showed him to be no other than Hofer.

He stepped out, mile after mile, along the steep path towards the
famous salt-mines. Huge masses of rock, hanging over his head, seemed
suspended by little short of a miracle; dark pine-forests clothed the
rugged cliffs, cascades dashed from innumerable heights, some close by
the path, others heard thundering above; the foaming torrent was here
and there spanned by bridges of snow, while huge, unmelted avalanches
lay in its bed.

As Hofer proceeded, he came up with a tall, dark, athletic man, going
towards the mines. When he got close to him, he grasped his shoulder.
The man started, turned round, and joyfully embraced him.

"Praised be the name of our Lord!" said he.

"Amen, and Amen!" said Hofer, raising his hat. "Brother, what a dance
you have led me! They told me in Halle you had just delivered a load of
wood, and I should find you here. But what? can you spare leisure to
carry wood in these times?"

"A contract must be fulfilled," said Speckbacher. "I contracted, before
the war broke out, to supply the works with a certain quantity of wood
in a certain time. This has been my last journey, I am happy to say--my
man Zoppel will drive the oxen after to-day, and the contract expires
within a week."

"That is well, for there is plenty for you to do. We expect to make
head against the enemy to-morrow, and you must join us with the men of
the lower Innthal."

"Surely. Where are we to march?"

"On Innsbruck."

"Capital! Teimer joins us, of course?"

"With the men of the upper Inn. I shall occupy Mount Brenner, ready to
drop down on the city. The regulars, under General Buol, will be higher
up. Father Joachim will head the peasants on Berg Isel."

"Come, we ought to succeed this time. I hope we shall not only take the
city, but keep it better than we did before. Father Joachim has sent me
an amulet, to keep me from harm. Do you think there's anything in it?"

"Well--what know I? This I know--the Lord of hosts has protected you
and me, my friend, through many dangers, thus far, without e'er an
amulet; so I hope He will continue to do so henceforth."

"Well--yes. Maria wished me to wear it, so I thought it would do no
harm--it makes her easy, you know."

"There's something that would make me easy, my brother, if you will
yield to me--let us seek the blessing of God in prayer."

"Certainly, if you wish it."

They were just in front of a rude cross, sculptured on the face of the
rock. The two men knelt, and fervently prayed aloud, each in turn, for
some minutes. Hofer rose, looking comforted.

"I'm all the better for that," said Speckbacher, heartily.

"How can it be otherwise, brother? God has bidden us cast our care upon
Him; it is our own fault if we do it not."

They proceeded on their way.

"I wonder if Chastelar ever kneels down and prays as we have just
done," said Speckbacher presently.

"There's no saying, brother; I should hope he does. There seems to me
to be little praying in camps. Men touch their hats as they pass a
picture or a crucifix--that is pretty nearly all; outwardly, at least,
which is all we can judge from. But sure I am, that those who prayed
often--from the heart, look you,--would not take God's holy name in
vain."

"How the French curse and swear, Hofer! and yet they say, many of them,
there's no God. They laugh at us for praying for success, because they
say they have it without."

"Pity, brother, they have not something better to laugh about. Ah,
God _does_ give his foes success sometimes, and deprive his children
of it; but not because He does not hear and answer prayer. He never
permits their success, and our defeat, save for our good. Why now,
has He not said He will try us seven times in the fire? First, may
be, He tests our courage; well, we prove to have it: then our love;
well, we have some, though it were to be wished we had more. Then, our
faith; very little is found. Into the fire we must go. By and by, our
unfaithfulness is somewhat purged away. Well, but then, may be, he
tries our submission; finds it very poor. Into the fire with us! After
that, our patience. Oh, perhaps a great, thick scum boils up to the top
of the pot, and shows how far from perfection we are yet. Instead of
setting us aside to cool, he stirs up the fire hotter and hotter, never
minding our boiling and bubbling, so long as we don't boil over. Well,
supposing fused metal had the feelings of a man, just fancy its state!
At last the scum parts! the pure, bright silver appears!--he stoops
over it, sees in it _his own face_,--takes us to heaven!"

"Oh me! I don't believe I could stand all that!" cried Speckbacher,
turning pale. "You might, but I couldn't!"

"God only knows our hearts," replied the Sandwirth. "You and I may lie
stark and stiff before another night; but what then? we shall be with
Him."

"May it please Him, we shall," said Speckbacher, devoutly crossing
himself.

"Sandwirth," cried he, after a pause, "what a life mine has been! Oh,
when I think of the sins of my youth, I see what a long, long chain
must be let down from heaven, to draw me up to it! What could you
expect from me, poor little orphan as I was at seven years old, but
that I should go astray like a youngling of the flock, whose mother has
fallen over the cliff? My relations were severe: I had no happiness in
the house: so I sought it out of it. Evil companions fell in my way,
and tried to make me as wicked as themselves. They feared no God; what
wonder they feared no man? We robbed, we gamed, we drank; we sang, told
jolly tales, and made merry; but I never was happy.

"One day we were on a predatory expedition. I had separated a little
from the rest, when I heard an inexpressibly mournful cry; it seemed
to say, 'Oh, woe, woe, woe!' I stood fixed to the spot; my blood ran
cold: at length I hurried on to join my comrades, and begged them to
turn back to hearken to a cry of distress in the wood. They treated
it with indifference, and said we must push on, there was no time to
lose. I, however, lingered; then turned back. Following the sound,
which became more and more lamentable, I suddenly almost toppled over
the edge of a tremendous cliff, seven hundred feet high! It took me so
by surprise that I shrank back, appalled and breathless. Half way down
hung a miserable man, one of our company whom we had not missed, whose
clothes, as he fell, had been caught by some projection in the rock,
and who was nearly doubled in half, his head towards his toes, with
horrible death beneath him. I shouted, 'Don't fear! I'll run for aid!'
and did so, without knowing whether he heard me or not. But when, after
a long run, I came in sight of my comrades, they were in the hands of
justice, and I was the only one that escaped. I flew back to the edge
of the cliff. The poor wretch's slight support had given way, and he
lay, a mangled mass of bones and blood, at the bottom. When I came to
myself,--oh, Hofer, can you wonder I was another man?"

Speckbacher's feelings here so overcame him that he leant against the
rock a moment for support.

"Doubtless the hand of the Lord was in the event, brother," said Hofer.
"To the one He showed judgment, to the other mercy."

"Mercy? Yes, what mercy! He drew me into the way of the Schmeiders, a
family of piety and of love. Soon I felt their softening influence;
at length I became their inmate. The old man had known my father; he
interested himself in getting me employed in supplying wood to the
salt-works. After a time, he saw a growing affection between Maria and
me: he did not discourage it; he told me I should marry her. I told him
how bad I had been; he would not recall his promise, but fixed a time,
and said that if I continued steady till then, we should be united. And
so we were. Ah! God be praised!"

Some men, coming from the mines, here approached and passed them, which
changed the subject of conversation.

"Has General Chastelar forgiven the men of Halle for drubbing him yet?"
said Speckbacher.

"Why, he cannot be expected to forget it very readily," said Hofer.
"It was a bad business, and did them no credit, I think. The poor
general had had his turn of ill luck, and could hardly have been better
pleased at his defeat than we were; but did that authorize a set of
angry fellows to waylay him with cudgels, and thump him so that he was
obliged to keep his bed two days? No, no, I say."

"I can't help laughing at it, though," said Speckbacher; "it was
taking the law so into their own hands. His ardour for us was already
beginning to cool; and, for my part, I think he has done us very little
good, from first to last. But here we are. I was on my way to the
superintendent; but you have never seen the mines: would not you like
to do so?"

"Very much."

"Come this way, then--I will find you a miner's overcoat and staff.
They will give us flambeaux."

Hofer presently found himself descending the noted three hundred steps,
with considerable excitement, and a little trepidation. He seemed
entering a new world, the withdrawal of daylight from which gave it
something inexpressibly dismal. The interminable galleries and caverns,
the unfathomed lakes, the dim lights, the hollow, unearthly sounds,
sensibly affected his imagination; and when they now and then came up
to a solitary miner, with his little candle, constantly striking his
axe into the wall before him, a profound feeling of pity towards him
oppressed his kind heart.

"It is wonderful! truly wonderful!" ejaculated he, as they once more
emerged into the warm sunlight; "but I am very glad to find myself out
of it. I could not help thinking of poor wretches in the bottomless
pit."

"Hofer! when you were comparing the true believer, just now, to metal
molten over the fire, I could not help thinking that their foes are
like the crackling sticks in that fire, that help to heat the silver.
They are _unintelligent agents_; they make a great blaze, and shine
very bright, for a little while. How soon they become extinct!"

"Ah! I never like to think of it,--it melts me with sorrow. If the true
believer has such a hard fight of it, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear? Brother, let us leave such matters to the God who made
those salt caverns. I thought, before I entered them, they would afford
me a good opportunity for some more talk with you about to-morrow; but
when I was once within them, the God of nature made me hold my peace."

"Here is a niche, Anderl, where we can sit and talk our fill. It seems
to me we shall very likely fall short of powder and bullets--what can
we do?"

They sat down and arranged, as well as they could, the plans for
the morrow. But they were, after all, unskilled tacticians, as far
as science went: men rather of deeds than words, who felt a certain
consciousness of what they themselves could do, and what they could
expect from one another. However, before they parted, they had decided
their own parts in what proved to be the most important struggle that
occurred during the Tyrolean war.

On the morning of May 29th, both parties were prepared to try their
strength--the Bavarians with all the advantages of regular training
and skill; the Tyrolese armed with valour and love of their freedom
and their country. Seventeen thousand peasants, badly accoutred for
war, scantily provided with ammunition, and headed not by one but by
several chiefs, were supported by a thousand Austrian regulars, sixty
or seventy horse, and five pieces of cannon.

General Deroy opposed them with eight thousand Bavarian infantry, one
thousand cavalry, and twenty-five cannon.

Hofer slept overnight at a little tavern called the Spade, a short
distance from Innsbruck. He and his men began the day with a hearty
meal, which some who had three or four good meals every day of their
lives, afterwards called "carousing:"--and on this splendid carouse of
bread, cheese, and beer, the brave men, commending their good cause to
Heaven, started forth to the field. Speckbacher, however, had opened
the day on the bridge of Halle, which was obstinately contested, but
which he carried; and the engagement then became general. The peasantry
led by Father Joachim poured down from the Iselberg, and attacked the
Bavarians with fury, while Teimer fell on them from the rear.

"The Bavarians," says a writer, "had every advantage on their side,
except their numbers." We may add, and except their cause. They had
passed the night quietly in and about Innsbruck, had an ample supply
of provisions, while the Tyrolese had only their little meal-bags; and
were well armed, while many of the Tyrolese were provided with nothing
better than pitchforks or scythes. Under all these circumstances, it
is surprising, says the above-quoted chronicler, that the Bavarians
suffered themselves to be brought to action; or that, being engaged,
they should sustain a defeat. Yes, very surprising, no doubt; and
equally surprising that Baron Hormayr returned no answers to Hofer's
repeated and urgent missives, during several previous days, to advance
to support the Tyrolese: and that when, somewhat tardily, he moved from
his quarters at Landeck, he only proceeded to Imst, where he lay in bed
for a sore throat. He had taken a chill.

Meantime, Speckbacher, with six hundred men, having carried the bridge,
had thrice dislodged the Bavarians from the farm of Rainerhof, twice
been driven out, and the third time triumphantly taken it: earning for
himself from the other side the questionable title of the Fire-devil.
The owners of the farm were in it all the time. A girl named Lisa,
seeing Speckbacher's lips dry and parched, exclaimed, "That brave man
shall not die of thirst if I can help it"--and carrying out a small
cask of wine into the midst, she began to dispense its contents in a
mug, first to him and then to his comrades, when a bullet struck the
cask and made a small orifice near the spiggot. Thrusting her thumb
into the hole, she cried, laughing, "Come, men, drink fast, or it will
run out quicker than I can stop it!"

Father Joachim, flying about the field, shouting to his men and
brandishing aloft his huge ebony crucifix, performed, it is said,
prodigies of valour and generalship. He was humane, too, binding up
wounds, whispering brief absolution into the ears of the dying; and
once, at least, narrowly escaped death himself, for a Bavarian was
about to run him through the body with his bayonet, when he himself was
brought down by a rifle.

Hofer did not come up till some hours later, but then turned the
fortune of the day. Somewhat after him arrived Martin Teimer, on the
heights of Hotting; on seeing whom, the Bavarians advanced with great
resolution on the Iselberg. The Austrians, under Colonel Ertel, who
were somewhat dispersed, drew up in haste to receive them, supported by
a large body of Tyrolese, and the Bavarians maintained the contest for
some time with great gallantry; but the Tyrolese sharpshooters among
the rocks thinned their ranks so formidably that their destruction
would have been inevitable, had not the peasants fallen short of
ammunition. An officer with a trumpet was therefore despatched to the
Bavarian commander, advising him to lay down his arms; and, as he had
just heard that one of his outposts had been carried by the Austrians,
he conceded a suspension of hostilities for twenty-four hours, and,
under cover of the night, effected a precipitate retreat, leaving the
Tyrolese complete masters of the field.

"Aha," said Speckbacher, shaking his fist at some ammunition-wagons
which now, rather too tardily, loomed large in the distance,--"had you
come up a little sooner.... But, no matter--Innsbruck is a second time
ours!"

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII.

THE LATTER END OF A FRAY, AND THE BEGINNING OF A FEAST.


The loss of the Tyrolese amounted to sixty-two killed and ninety-seven
wounded; of their friends the Austrians, twenty-five killed and
fifty-nine wounded. Of the Bavarians were reckoned two thousand five
hundred killed and wounded, including several officers.

The engagement had lasted till seven in the evening. At nine the
Bavarians retreated to Kufstein under favour of the darkness. At
four o'clock the next morning, the victorious peasantry flocked
indiscriminately into Innsbruck, shouting and singing, without any
order, but yet without the least offence in their demeanour or
proceedings. At nine o'clock Hofer marched in at the head of the men of
Passeyr; and with Father Joachim at his right hand. By this time the
city was full to overflowing--

  "You would have thought the very windows spake,
   So many greedy looks of young and old
   Through casements darted their desiring eyes
   Upon his visage;"

--for, certainly, the impression prevailed among the good people of
Innsbruck that he was the great man of the day, and so it continued to
do.

Michael Stumff, beaming like the sun, stood on the threshold of his
house to catch a glimpse of the Sandwirth as he passed, vaunting much
his familiarity with him to those who were willing to listen; and
extolling his valour because it enhanced the honour of his acquaintance.

"Yes, yes," he repeated, wagging his head, "there's more in him than
you'd think, for as homely as he looks. Why now, Chastelar,--we've
had General Chastelar among us, though now, I'm sorry to hear, he has
quitted the country,--and Hormayr--we've had Baron Hormayr among us
too, of whose doings or misdoings at this present occasion, I suppose
we shall shortly have his own account,--both of these have been counted
noteworthy men,--to say nothing of our own Baron Taxis--but, to my
mind, there's not a greater man among 'em all, in spite of his homely
bearing, than my honest friend the Sandwirth. Ah, here he comes!--nay,
not yet--How the bells are ringing! and yet there's such a din, clang,
and confusion, they scarce can be heard. Here he comes, then!--yes,
yes, the green jackets walking six or eight abreast--there's _he_, look
you, neighbour!--there's my old ally the Sandwirth!--many a pot of beer
have he and I shared together! And now, see you, he has a feather
in his hat, and a sword at his side, and pistols in his belt. Hurra!
hurra! I say, Sandwirth!--(Nod at him, Alouise--I'll catch his eye.)
Hurra! hurra!--"

The churches received them. As many as could enter them, crowded the
aisles; the rest hung about the doors. After victory and thanksgiving,
naturally came feasting. Wounded men were more slowly brought into
the city, and hospitably received; and numbers of escaped Tyrolese
prisoners came panting back to their friends at intervals throughout
the day.

The Bavarians had pretty well consumed the edibles of Innsbruck, but
the damage was being repaired as fast as was possible by supplies from
the country. Every house had its table spread with such things as came
to hand, for the refreshment of all comers. At the inns and public
rooms, dances were got up; and those who had fought overnight might
now be seen cutting tremendous capers and taking wondrous leaps, with
some fair partner of equal agility. But, flirting? none; the Tyrolese
eminently cultivate decorum, and know how to be merry and wise. If you
choose your partner, it is for the entire evening; and often proves to
be your partner for life.

Late in the evening Baron Hormayr arrived at the Taxis Palace. His
throat was very sore, and he was very hoarse, and not a little vexed
at having had no share in the glory of the day. Flinging himself on a
sofa, he desired Hofer might be instantly sought, found, and sent to
him.

In due course, the Sandwirth presented himself.

"So here you are, Hofer!" cried the Baron, feverishly shaking up the
cushion under his head.

"Here we are, baron--in Innsbruck--"

"Aye, aye, I suppose you are all mightily pleased. If I had not had
the worst cold I ever had in my life, I should have been up with
you--(Just ring for a tisane--) Regularly knocked up at Imst, my good
fellow--could only dictate my orders in a whisper; and fretted to death
at not being able to lead the attack at Scharnitz. Well, and so--O,
you've got on Chastelar's sword and pistols, I see."

"The sword and pistols the general gave me, baron."

"Aha! Made a good show! hey?"

"Helped to do good service, I hope."

"No doubt, no doubt. The people adore you, Hofer! And yet you haven't
been much of a fighting man--what makes them like you so?--hey?"

"I do not justly know, baron, save that they know I love them. Love
kindles love, you know."

"Aye, aye--well, but how went the day? Eisenstecken and you, I suppose,
helped Colonel Ertel in winning the day?"

"Well, baron, Eisenstecken is a good lad, but I should have said Father
Joachim, Speckbacher, and I won the day, helped by Colonel Ertel. But,
since it is won, it's no matter."

"Just so, you all did your best, my good friend--"

"We were quite at a stand-still at one time, for powder and bullets."

"Hofer! what a shocking want of ammunition there has been throughout
this campaign! General Buol has been in a wretched state, without
either ammunition or money. There he has remained, on the Brenner with
twenty-three hundred men, and actually not a cartridge!--"

"Our men were making cartridges all day long, for three days before
the battle. You know, baron, the Tyrol has few resources in itself; we
have few powder-mills, and the frontiers are now so watched that it is
exceeding difficult to get any into the country, even when we have any
money to pay for it, which generally we have not."

"No, and then you waste so much in _feux-de-joie_ and such nonsense, at
every rustic wedding and merry-making; every petty success. Why, I can
hear your sharpshooters peppering away now!"

"Because yesterday's was not a petty success. Forgive them, baron.
Every time we fight you a Berg Isel, you may afford us a _feu-de-joie_.
However, the lads are wasting their powder now, I acknowledge; and,
when I go hence, I will stop it."

"Do so; and--just give me that carafe of iced water and the goblet; I'm
so thirsty!--Have some wine, Hofer?"

"No, baron, I thank you."

"Tell them, Hofer, for goodness' sake, to husband what little
ammunition they possess, for they don't know how important it is."

"Oh yes, they do, baron! They knew, yesterday, when their own was
spent; and luckily, the Bavarians' was exhausted too!"

"Ha, ha!"

"Speckbacher has a little boy, who runs into the thick of the fight,
picks up bullets, and brings them to his father to use again."

"Ha, ha! Cool!--Where's Speckbacher now?"

"At the heels of the Bavarians."

"Where's Major Teimer?"

"At the heels of Speckbacher."

"Ho!--Well, Hofer, you'll just speak to your men--and to-morrow I'll
put forth a proclamation--I'd dictate it to-night, only my head aches
ready to split--telling every true Tyrolean, whose heart, and so
forth,--had better show his love of his country by abstaining from
feu-de-joieing, and by hunting up, without delay, all such arms,
rifles, muskets, swords, cavalry saddles, and what not, as can be
found, and bringing them with all speed to head-quarters. Bless my
heart! what a number of precious lives might be taken by the ammunition
these silly clodhoppers are now wasting!"

"I'll go to them at once, baron. And, if you'll take my unworthy
advice, you'll go to bed, and drink something hot."

"Thank you, thank you,--I believe I shall, or something cold, for I'm
very feverish--you see one eye is quite bunged up already. Good night.
I'm sorry you won't take a glass of wine, though. Let me see you in the
morning."

Hofer assented, with a gesture, and withdrew. "Poor man! poor
gentleman, I mean," thought he. "He seems much afflicted at having a
stuffing in the head; almost as much as at not having won yesterday's
battle. Well, well! we must each do what we can, we are but as God made
us."

Here he was joined by Giuseppe Eisenstecken, who had been drinking iced
champagne, and seemed very cheerful.

"_Sanvird_," said he, clapping his hand familiarly on Hofer's shoulder,
"what reward do you think I have hit on for my work of yesterday?"

"What reward have I thought of for myself or Speckbacher?" said Hofer.
"Our success is reward enough for us all, I think."

"Ah, basta! I have been a good adjutant to you, _Sanvird_. Without me
the day would not have been won--"

"Oh, indeed! I have yet to learn it."

"_Sanvird_, you have a daughter--"

"Three."

"Ah! Two are children--your Theresa is ... _bella, bella veramente_!"

"I have not now to learn that," said Hofer, laughing and shaking him
off; "but you had better think of something else, my lad--you and she
have nothing in common."

"Oh, I'm aware I am not common," said Giuseppe, "but any little
advantage I may have of birth--"

"Hold, there, my boy. We Hofers have been Sandwirths of repute for many
generations. Good night, now. I am very tired, and am going to bed; and
I advise you to do the same."

Eisenstecken stared, shrugged his shoulders, and walked off to the
theatre.

When the news of the victory of Berg Isel spread through the valleys,
which it did like wildfire, much rejoicing and festivity ensued. The
darling passion of the mountaineers is for music and dancing. Every
cottage has its violin or guitar; and the Tyrolese not only sing,
but have a gift of improvising verses, rough indeed, and with little
pretension to polish or harmony, but not destitute of wit and satire,
nor without occasional touches of pathos. These accomplishments were
brought into play at a national festival given in honour of the victory
of Berg Isel. The chief merit attained or aimed at, is a quickness
at repartee; each party in the impromptu dialogue striving to make
the other ridiculous. Sometimes when the cut is very unexpected, the
person assailed is bereft of presence of mind; and his or her confusion
affords abundant amusement to the audience.

Theresa, Rudolf, and Franz were all good at this pastime--Rudolf
the best, because Theresa's bashfulness often restrained her, and
Franz's satire scarcely ever rose to the value of wit. At the rustic
merry-making at _am Sand_, all three were present; and Franz, nettled
by Theresa's rejection of him, assailed her with several such stinging
impromptus, that were no impromptus at all, having been prepared
beforehand, that Theresa turned the tables on him, with a true woman's
malice, for cowardice on the day of battle, and invented such a number
of absurd reasons for his keeping out of harm's way, that hearty
laughter resounded on all sides; and Franz, smarting more than he
showed, secretly resolved to have his day of revenge.

Meanwhile, the ground was clearing for wrestlers. Almost every Tyrolese
wears a thick silver or iron ring on the little finger of the right
hand, to use in the pugilistic encounters they call _robeln_; and a
fist so armed can inflict cruel wounds. Franz, irritated by Theresa's
sarcasms, felt a burning desire to inflict some disfiguring hurt on
Rudolf; and, though rather afraid of trying his strength with him, the
evil desire predominated, and he challenged him to a match. But Rudolf
happened to have no mind for it; and as soon as Franz clearly made
out this, he never ceased pestering Rudolf, and twitting him with his
backwardness, till Rudolf, at length losing patience, told him that if
he did not desist, he would pitch him into the Passeyr.

Such a wicked expression came into Franz's face, on this, that it made
Theresa's blood run cold; and she hastily interrupted the strife by
exclaiming, "The miracle-play is just going to begin. Franz, are not
you to be the Philistine?"

The subject was David and Goliath. Rudolf was David, and Franz (on
stilts) Goliath. The subordinate parts were filled by other peasants.
Rudolf came in, driving a real donkey, supposed to be laden with the
ten cheeses for his brethren's captain; and he questioned about the
fight, and answered his brother's rebuke very effectively. Franz
mouthed the defiance to Israel extremely well, and straddled and
swaggered about like a very Goliath. The Passeyr was very handy to
represent the brook that supplied the pebbles; and Rudolf, though he
slung the stone near enough to his antagonist to make Franz swerve
his head considerably to one side, was at pains not really to hit
him. Franz did not know this, however; he thought the pebble was
slung unreasonably and maliciously close; therefore, when Rudolf ran
up to his prostrate body to make believe to sever his head with the
Sandwirth's own sword, Franz hooked his foot round his rival's ankle,
and suddenly brought him with violence to the ground. This was so
unexpected a catastrophe, that a cry, mingled with laughter, arose
from the audience. But Rudolf was not to be so baffled; he clasped his
arms strictly round his foe, who already was under him, and writhing,
struggling, and rolling, they twisted one another about till Rudolf
finally got his antagonist to the water's edge, and soused him in the
Passeyr. Whereupon there naturally ensued a clamour of laughter and
applause; and the victor was tumultuously greeted; while the drenched
giant slunk moodily out of sight.

Rudolf now triumphantly mounted the stilts, and strode round the green;
but Hofer, who had played King Saul, and who liked a joke as well as
any one, aimed a large turnip so well at the right stilt, that Rudolf
was suddenly laid prostrate. As his encumbrances effectually prevented
his rising, (the ends being seized by several little boys, and big ones
too,) he lay quite at the mercy of the public, especially of Theresa,
who sang a requiem over him, much in the style of "Who killed cock
robin?"

  Who killed poor David?
  Can this be he who late was seen
  The pride of every village-green?
      Alas, poor David!

  Who fetched him down?
  On lordly stilts we saw him stride
  A season brief, too swollen with pride--
      Alas, poor David!

  Take warning, all with pride elate,
  Behold this hapless youngster's fate;
  A turnip vile has cracked his pate.
      Alas, poor David!

It was remarked that as soon as Theresa began to sing, the prostrate
victim lay quite still; and as soon as she ceased, he declared in a
loud voice that since he was dead, he was determined to be buried.
"Four proper youths and tall" immediately stepped forward, and raised
him, stiff as a log, on their shoulders, then bore him with decent
solemnity to the dust heap.

After this deportation, Rudolf seemed to think himself exonerated from
further communication with any of his fellow-mortals, except Theresa,
with whom he was seen, by those who thought it worth while to look
after him, in earnest conversation at the dairy-door.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV.

TROUBLED WATERS.


Four men, two of whom wore the brown serge gowns of Capuchins, might
have been seen, on the fourth of June, sitting on the bank of a foaming
river, and presently rising in stilts from the pebbly bed of the river
itself, sounding their way in advance, as they crossed it, by the aid
of long poles. These were Hofer, Eisenstecken, Father Joachim, and
Father Peter, on their way to Rattenberg, where they were to meet
Hormayr, Baron Taxis, the engineer Hauser, and the chiefs of the lower
Innthal. At this time, the Inn was so swollen by recent and heavy
rains, as to be both difficult and dangerous to cross; but the bridges
had all been destroyed during the warfare, and our friends had only
this hazardous mode of fording the river.

"I'm going!" cried Father Peter, in alarm, as the running water,
flashing in the sun, dazzled his eye.

"Why, brother, didst never walk on stilts before?" cried Father
Joachim, catching him by the arm, and heartily laughing. "Shame on
you for a faint heart. Steady, steady. Don't upset _me_, though, good
brother."

"Or I may chance to get a rap on the head with that staff," muttered
Father Peter. "There! I'm out of the perilous waters at last,--the most
dangerous voyage I ever undertook."

Saying which, he scrambled out on the other bank, giving a lurch,
however, as he did so, which entangled his stilt in one of Father
Joachim's, and nearly gave him a ducking. The excellent Capuchin turned
exceedingly red, but suppressed his wrath, if he felt any, merely
observing, "Thou deservest a crack on the pate most assuredly, good
brother!"

Then, having burst into a jolly laugh, that made the hills ring again,
he suddenly stopped short, wiped his eyes, and went on, silent as
night; till at length he said to Hofer--

"A laugh is worth a zwanziger now and then. Or else, it makes my heart
sore to pass along this valley, only a few weeks ago in the highest
possible state of cultivation, and diversified with villages in the
neatest order; now presenting on every side a spectacle of ruin and
desolation."

"_Eheu_," sighed Father Peter, in response, "'_Incenderunt igni
sanctuarium tuum; in terra polluerunt nominis tui._'"

"Nevertheless, brother," rejoined Father Joachim, "_'Lætabitur justus
in Domino, et sperabit in eo, ut laudabuntur omnes recti corde;_'
which, if we interpret for the benefit of the unlearned, is as much as
to say, the righteous shall, notwithstanding, rejoice in the Lord and
put their trust in Him; and all they that are true of heart shall be
glad."

"The Bavarians may trust in their chariots and horses," said Hofer,
"but we will trust in the Lord our God."

"Ah, I wish we had some more horses, though," broke in Eisenstecken,
"for we are miserably deficient in cavalry."

"What on earth should we do with cavalry?" cried Father Joachim. "Why,
our very want of it makes us respected the more, because our successes
can only be attributed to our natural intrepidity and resolution."

"Pardon me, father; our successes can only last among the hills, we
cannot compete with the enemy in the plains."

"Never mind that," interposed Father Peter, setting aside an objection
that could not be answered. "Let them keep their plains to themselves,
as long as we have our hills."

While talking in this desultory fashion, they came up with one of those
rustic processions so common in the mountains, when the cows, having
exhausted the pastures in the valleys, are driven up the hills for
the summer. The tinkling of bells, and rustic sounds of music which
accompanied it, could be heard far off. First came the _senner_,
or milker, at the head of the cows, with ribbons of many colours
bedecking his hat and shoes, and a long staff in his hand, with which
he gesticulated in a theatrical manner. Immediately after him marched
the principal cow of a herd amounting to some hundreds, belonging
to different farmers; her head and neck were decorated with immense
garlands of the gayest flowers, interspersed with knots and streamers,
pink, blue, and yellow, and bearing a deep-toned bell suspended by an
embroidered strap. The other cows succeeded, each adorned with smaller
bells, streamers, and garlands, and quite aware of their subordinate
dignity. Then came the _galleter_, driving the heifers and calves,
and having in his charge the fetters and halters of the whole herd.
Then followed the goat-keeper, with a long train of goats; then the
_schäfer_, or shepherd, with his numerous flocks of sheep; and lastly,
the _sandirne_, or pig-driver, with his unruly herd.

When the _senner_ in advance of this procession came near enough to
be recognised, he proved to be Franz, who was a good herdsman enough,
and being never very fond of either smuggling or fighting when they
threatened much danger, was very glad to get a safe, and, in the eyes
of mountaineers, honourable, employment for the rest of the summer.
He enjoyed the pomp and circumstance of the procession amazingly,
and hardly less so the prospect of occasional long, lonely hours of
luxurious idleness which were sure to follow, when lying at full length
on thymy banks watching his charge.

Lenora had trimmed his hat and shoes with the greatest taste, helped
him to furbish up the bells, and provided him with many little
comforts. As soon as he saw he was recognised by acquaintance, his
self-importance increased ten-fold. He attitudinized, strutted,
and flourished his staff, till he made, as Giuseppe contemptuously
observed, quite an ape of himself. Hofer, pitying him more than he
deserved for the inglorious life he was going to lead, spoke a few kind
words to him, and the priests gave him their blessings.

There is, or was, a good old inn, in the quaint little old-fashioned
town of Rattenberg. In the best room of this inn, the three barons were
already awaiting the Tyrolese, and chafing a little at their not having
arrived first.

"Here they come at last," muttered Baron Hauser; "four of them, and we
have only ordered covers for six."

"Who is the fourth?" said Baron Hormayr, looking up from his papers;
"Teimer, perhaps."

"No; two Capuchins, Hofer, and a tall, swarthy youth--"

"Oh, Eisenstecken--I forgot the second Capuchin--he may be of use, but
he is not equal to Father Joachim. Well, Hofer, here at last, man!"

"The Inn was turbid, baron, and the bridges broken."

"Ha! how did you ford it?"

"On stilts."

"Ha, ha! that made you late, I suppose."

"And wet, too," said Father Joachim, shaking his gown.

"Ha, ha! Capuchins on stilts! The idea is amusing."

"I don't know what to say to that," said Father Peter bluntly, "unless
you find amusement in the discomfort of your fellow-creatures."

"Pardon, good father. Hungry men are apt to be captious, and I feared
our fish would be spoilt; here it comes,--let us hope for the best."

Father Joachim said grace, and they fed like hungry men as much as
heroes. After the dishes were removed, which was not in less than an
hour, they began to talk of business.

"We want a map," said Baron Taxis; "Hauser, have you one?"

Hauser produced a map, but it was too small, and proved to be
incorrect. Hofer eyed it with contempt.

"I can draw a better map than that," said he, dipping his finger
in his glass, and making various small slops on the table. "This is
Hobranz, and this is Kempten; here are our men of the Vorarlberg, and
here the Bavarians."

"You have made Kempten too large in proportion to Hobranz," said Baron
Hauser, superciliously.

"The position is the question, not the size," said Hofer; which was so
undeniably the case, that the baron did not reply to it.

"Well then, here is Fuessen," said Hormayr. "The men of Vorarlberg must
try to effect a junction with Teimer somewhere hereabouts; and Major
Dietrich, advancing by Ettal, will assist the communication; while you,
Taxis, will advance towards Clagenfurt; and Leinengen towards Trent.
We shall muster little short of thirty thousand men, regulars and
Tyrolese; and if this movement succeeds, my judgment is, that it will
lead to the entire liberation of the Tyrol."

The discussion lasted long; and the council broke up, animated with
sanguine hopes of success. In a few days the scheme was attempted.
Unfortunately, Martin Teimer, by some mistake, overshot his mark, and
being ignorant of the country, strayed away from the men of Vorarlberg,
and fell in with a detachment of the enemy, by whom he was nearly
made prisoner. Meanwhile, the Vorarlbergers, whose eagerness had made
them begin the fight early in the day, were disappointed of Teimer's
expected support; and only owing to their great intrepidity and
coolness, were able to retire in good order: which was all they had
to console them for not winning a brilliant victory. Count Leinengen
was threatened with bombardment in Trent, and Hormayr and Hofer were
hastening to his relief, when they learnt that the enemy had retired. A
few subsequent skirmishes in the mountains had no result of importance.

Suddenly the news reached the combatants of the decisive battle of
Wagram, one of the most brilliant fields ever won by Buonaparte, and
disastrous in its effects on the Austrian cause. All further resistance
being abandoned by the vanquished, they were glad to conclude the
armistice of Znaim, by which they agreed to evacuate the Tyrol.

Words cannot describe the trouble and indignation of the Tyrolese, when
this news, which they at first refused to believe, was fully confirmed.
Eisenstecken, and a party of his companions in arms, rushed into the
little cottage which gave Hofer temporary shelter, and passionately
implored him to be their chief, and prevent the Austrian troops from
leaving the country.

With mild and pacifying words he assured them how wrong and fruitless
this would be. They then besought him at least forcibly to detain the
Austrian ammunition, and attempt the liberation of their country
without the assistance of those who were deserting them.

Hofer demurred about the ammunition, but declared himself ready to obey
the call of his countrymen, and appointed a time and place for deciding
on what should be done. His listeners heard him joyfully, and hastened
away to spread the glad tidings; Eisenstecken not hesitating to attempt
to draw off from their allegiance as many of the Austrian privates as
he could.

Meanwhile, Hofer, summoned by Hormayr to resign his command, required
twelve hours for deliberation. Part of this interval was spent in grave
and sorrowful consultation with his fellow chiefs, and much of it in
deep and fervent prayer.

At the end of the time, "We have fought for the rights of Austria,"
said he--"we will now fight for our own."

This decision was hailed by the Tyrolese with transport. Attachment
and loyalty to the house of Austria had ever been their prominent
characteristics; they had been incited to rise by the Emperor himself,
and had fought for him faithfully and well. Deserted by him, their
independence was now at stake; and while despotism crushed the
liberties of nearly all Europe, this handful of heroic mountaineers
resolved to free themselves or perish.

The Tyrolese flocked to Hofer's standard the instant it was raised;
the Austrian troops in the Vorarlberg deserted their leaders and
enthusiastically joined the insurgents. Many of the Austrian troops
who had begun to march homewards, were persuaded by the Tyrolese to
turn back. Nearly the whole of Taxis's corps deserted him, and quietly
marched to Hofer, deaf to threats and entreaties. Hofer, who had
declared himself willing to fight under Leinengen as a simple soldier
if his countrymen preferred it, found himself unanimously elected
Commander-in-Chief.

Poor Baron Hormayr was in a pitiable state of mind; annoyed beyond
measure at the armistice, yet with every feeling of a disciplinarian
outraged by the extremely irregular conduct of the Tyrolese and the
insubordination of his own troops. Looking upon Hofer and Speckbacher
as the magicians by whom alone the storm could be quelled, he sent for
the former, and earnestly, importunately besought him to think well of
what he was about before he refused to lay down his arms.

But Hofer was immoveable. He had deliberated in great trouble on what
was right and necessary; and having besought divine direction, his
conviction was now unshaken as to the duty of maintaining the cause,
whether successfully or not. In his previous summons to Hormayr, he had
been taken by surprise, had been very irresolute, had shifted from
foot to foot, played with his pistols and sword, spoken absently, and
betrayed all the marks of vacillation. He had had time to ponder and to
pray; and now Hormayr might as well have tried to move Mount Brenner.

As for Father Joachim, he had gone off, in a fit of desperation, to his
convent at Brixen, where he shut himself up in his cell, rolled on the
ground, smote himself on the breast, and tore handfuls out of his bushy
red beard.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV.

THE GORGE OF THE EISACH.


The Baron, vexed and provoked, next tried his rhetoric upon
Speckbacher. Now, Speckbacher was like the Passeyr in a high wind
up-current, "driven to and fro, and tost." He had of late been very
unprofitably spending his time in endeavouring to reduce the strong
fortress of Kufstein, and was a good deal humbled at finding it too
hard a nut for him to crack. Therefore, when Baron Hormayr, with all
his force of elocution, painted the hopelessness of the Tyrolese
cause, and the certainty of their making things considerably worse
for themselves if they were vanquished--Speckbacher lost his spirits
and became convinced that the case was desperate. Hormayr, seeing
his advantage, then hinted on Speckbacher's being particularly and
personally obnoxious to the Bavarians as a formidable insurgent
chief, observed on the desirableness of a temporary withdrawal from
public notice, and finally offered him a seat in his own carriage if
he would accompany him into Austria. Eisenstecken was on his way
thither already. Speckbacher's heart hovered over his cottage among the
beech-trees; but he was desponding and irresolute; a few coaxing words
settled the matter--he would but make a hasty visit to his home and
return, if the Baron would be so kind as to wait for him.

The Baron would do so by all means, but hoped he would be quick; so off
sped Speckbacher at a swinging pace, but with a heavy heart.

Arrived at his cottage, what should he see but his little boy at the
threshold, intently watching the farm-servant, Zoppel, making him a toy
rifle. Directly he looked up and saw his father, he joyfully cried out,
ran towards him, and clasped his knees; then seizing him by the hand,
dragged him towards the house, capering as he went.

Maria, meantime, had come to the door with a child in her arms and
another holding her apron.

"Home at last," said she with fond reproach.

"Home; soon to depart again," said Speckbacher, entering the house.

"No doubt," said she, pouting a little, as she gave him the baby to
kiss; "that's what we must expect as long as the war goes on; however,
you know, we talked that all over and counted up the cost at the
beginning, and decided not to mind it."

"We did," said Speckbacher in a melancholy tone.

"So you must not mind," pursued Maria cheerily, "if I do give you a
grumpy word or a pouting look now and then, because it is over in a
moment; for I assure you, I remember all you said to me too well to
think seriously of minding it at any time."

"But, Maria! Don't you know there has been an armistice proclaimed?"

"Between whom?"

"The French, Bavarians, and Austrians."

"To be sure I do," said she with curling lip; "but what have _we_ to do
with that?"

"Oh, what a question!" groaned Speckbacher.

"It hardly amounts to one, I think," said Maria. "Why, have not
all the Austrian soldiery deserted to us, and is not the Sandwirth
Commander-in-Chief?"

"My dearest Maria, Baron Hormayr has been using all his influence with
us both to forbear from shedding blood in a hopeless case. And he has
promised to take me with him in his own carriage to Vienna to be out of
the way a little, till the affair has blown over.

"What, and give up the cause?" cried Maria in blank dismay.

Her look smote her husband to the heart.

"Then you don't approve of it?" said he, inquiringly.

"Why, _do you_?"

"Well, I don't know--Eisenstecken has given it up for one--"

Maria dropped the baby into the little wooden cradle on the dresser,
and began to furbish a brass skillet very vigorously.

--"But, if you don't," faltered he, "neither shall I; for, if my life
is worth nothing to _you_, to me it is not of the value of a kreutzer."

"O Speckbacher!" cried she, suddenly flinging her arms about his neck.

"Well, what now?" said he; his eyes beginning to grow misty.

"How _can_ you say such things?" sobbed Maria. "Not worth a kreutzer,
indeed! You, the best Tyrolese that lives!--the father of a family--a
married man--a responsible person--known and beloved by all--to talk of
not being worth a kreutzer!--"

Here Anderl increased the effect by beginning to weep aloud, and with
perseverance.

"Well," said Speckbacher, in a stifled voice, and drawing her very
close to him, "you seemed to think I was deserting the cause--"

"Yes, only--no--that is--If Baron Hormayr says right,--and he ought to
know,--why, the cause is deserting _you_, not you it--at least--Ah, it
is not so! O Speckbacher, I am pulled two ways! why have you made me
think the cause so important all along, if you are going to forsake it
now?"

"Why, so it is--"

"Then, why desert it?"

"Because, dear, they say it's hopeless. I wish you would not use that
uncomfortable word 'desert.'"

"I will not--I feel persuaded that a brave man may forsake a hopeless
cause--nay, I think he owes it to those who love him. What sleepless
nights have you given me, Speckbacher! But now, if I think you are
safe, my rest will be sweet."

"I declare I know not what to do," cried Speckbacher, tossing his
arms upwards, and then starting up and pacing the room in an agitated
manner,--then, throwing himself into a seat,--"I'll be guided by you."

"Then go with the Baron," said Maria, after a moment's pause--"yours
is too precious a life to be thrown away. When I felt it useless to
remonstrate, and my mind was convinced besides, I wound myself up to
a sort of false composure; but now, that has all dissolved away; the
necessity for it is gone, and I can only see you, hear you, think of
you as the dearest of husbands, the best and tenderest of men."

Speckbacher wept. But his wife was firm. She packed up a little supply
of linen for him, bade him remember the Baron was waiting, kissed
him cheerfully, and watched him till he was out of sight. Speckbacher
trod much more heavily on his way back than when he came. Dejected,
solitary, slow, dragging a lengthening chain as he went, he tardily
returned to the Baron, who was getting fidgety.

"Your adieux took you a long time," said he, rather peevishly.

Speckbacher made no reply, but silently followed him into the carriage,
and they drove off towards Sterzing.

Baron Hormayr felt it would not do to neglect his companion; and, being
a man of considerable information and address, he began an agreeable
conversation with two aides-de-camp, who were of the party, relating
several anecdotes likely to interest Speckbacher, and beguile the way.
Nothing could win from the dispirited Tyrolese, however, more than a
divided attention. He assented absently to questions that were put to
him, sometimes quite at cross purposes; and so clearly betrayed his
dejection, that Hormayr at length ceased to waste his time on him, and
entered into discussions exclusively interesting to himself and the
aides-de-camp.

The road was at this time winding up a steep hill, and proceeded very
slowly; being choked with stones and brambles that had been cast across
it during the recent contest. Every inch of ground had been a scene of
struggle; to Speckbacher it was mournfully suggestive. Suddenly there
appeared on a rocky path immediately above the road, a man in green
with a red waistcoat, who gave a gesture of surprise when he saw them.
It was Hofer.

Stretching out his arms to Speckbacher, he cried in heart-rending
tones, while tears fast coursed his cheeks,--

"Ah! my friend! my comrade! my brother! whither are you going? they are
carrying you to ignominy! Return, ere it is yet too late! Return, my
friend! my brother!"

"Drive on!" cried Baron Hormayr passionately to his coachman, while
Speckbacher buried his face in his hands. But, close his eyes as he
would, he still saw the gestures, and heard the plaintive tones of the
man on the rock.

His resolution was taken.

On reaching Sterzing, where some trifling delay occurred, he slipped
away from his companions, and, procuring a horse, rode at full speed
after Hofer, while the Baron and his party waited for him in vain.
After a fruitless search, Hormayr perceived himself outwitted, and
pursued his journey in no very good temper; though, being on the whole
a kindly disposed man, he soon ceased to be annoyed, and even made a
joke of it.

Meanwhile, Speckbacher, spurring along the mountain road, came up with
Hofer on the Brenner, and hastily threw himself off his horse, leading
it towards him. Hofer, hearing his approach, turned about, and seeing
who it was, paused, stretching out his arms to him. When they met, they
mutely embraced.

"Escaped! Thank God!" said Hofer.

"Thank God," said Speckbacher, "I feel I've done right."

"Rely on it. The wonder to me, brother, is, that you could ever have
been over-persuaded. What! is our love of our country a mere dream?
How many have already laid down their lives for it! For my part, I can
die for freedom, but I cannot live a slave. Will Austria, think you,
be angry in her heart, that we continue the defence of the cause? On
the contrary, she will secretly rejoice in every success. Are you not
certified of it?"

"Yes."

"Every nation in Europe but one will rejoice in it. The English will
sympathize with us, so will the Swiss, so will the Italians, so will
the Northern nations. They will sympathize with us in our success,
because we deserve it--and, should we prove unfortunate, they will
sympathize with us all the more!"

"Hofer, go on talking--"

"First, let us pray, brother. Oh, how much we have to pray for! First,
our country,--that our poor, dear Tyrol may be delivered from all her
enemies; then for our emperor,--that he may look kindly on us; and
surely for our beloved Archduke John, whose heart is ever with us. Then
for ourselves. Oh, we have much need to ask for direction,--we are
poor, unskilled men, pitted against the cleverest man in the world; and
how can we hold our ground without supreme aid? Then for our wives,
children, and homes. See how much there is for which to pray."

Speckbacher reverently uncovered his head, and knelt. It was not the
first time they had thus sought heavenly guidance together. They arose
strengthened, calmed, and resolved.

On the second of August Father Joachim issued forth from his cell. He
heard that Lefevre, Duke of Dantzic, had seized Innsbruck, and had
boasted that the Capuchin's red beard should get well pulled; on which
he grimly observed, "The Redbeard may be too strong for him yet." From
that hour Father Joachim was known as "The Redbeard."

He met, by appointment, Hofer, Speckbacher, and their three worthy
weapon-brothers, Martin Schenk, Peter Kemmater, and Peter Mayer. These
men had all pledged themselves to free the Tyrol, or perish. Peter
Mayer was he, who being afterwards shot by order of Beauharnois at
Botzen, removed a small crucifix from his heart, and handed it to
a bystander, as the soldiers were preparing to fire, "lest," as he
quietly observed, "it should turn the shot."

Hofer's indecision was gone. "I have received an invitation," said he,
gaily, "from the Duke of Dantzic, to deliver myself up to him before
the 11th. I have sent him word he may expect me, with ten thousand
sharpshooters."

It was decided that Father Joachim should open the campaign. The
general rising took place on the fourth of August,--a day to be much
remembered.

The post to be contested was a bridge across the Eisach, which the
enemy were resolved to pass, and the Tyrolese were resolved they should
not. Father Joachim had prepared a tremendous barrier to their doing
so. He had caused enormous larch-trees to be felled, on which were
piled huge masses of rock, and heaps of brushwood and stones, the
whole being held together by strong cords, and thus suspended over the
precipice.

At one end of this fearful avalanche he stationed Rudolf, knife in
hand, ready to cut the ropes the moment he received instructions from a
comrade named Heisel, who commanded a view of the scene of action far
below.

When the enemy began to enter the pass, they found themselves only
opposed by small bodies of Tyrolese, who continued to fall back after
desperate but short attacks; and they began to think that though many
warnings had been given them of the danger of this pass, they should
find its difficulties exaggerated, and clear it without much loss.

Suddenly an old man, at least eighty years of age, with hair as white
as snow, but with the fire of youth in his dark eyes, levelled his
piece from behind an almost inaccessible crag, brought down his man,
reloaded his piece, and continued his deadly fire, never wasting a
bullet, yet without receiving the least hurt in return. His execution
was so fatal, that a couple of Saxons were detached, and privately sent
round by a circuitous path to seize him. As soon as they rushed upon
him, he shouted "Hurra!" shot the first, seized the second in his arms,
and, crying "In God's name!" precipitated himself with him into the
abyss below. The combatants looked on for a moment aghast.

The next instant, however, the word "Forward" was given in a voice of
thunder, and the invaders impetuously advanced, eager to get out of
this dreadful place. But there seemed to be fighting, or some other
obstacle, in front; the van did not advance, and the body of troops,
jammed together between those who came on from behind, and those who
did not or could not proceed in front, came to a stand.

Everything was so still at this awful moment, that a crow could be
heard cawing in the air, high aloft. This dread pause was broken by a
clear voice far up above, but immediately over them, crying--

"Heisel! shall I cut yet?"

"Not yet," replied another voice, that came wildly through the air.

The Saxons, who heard these ill-omened words, were occupying a little
basin, about two hundred and fifty paces across, hemmed in by rocks,
except where the narrow road crossed a bridge. The day was intensely
hot, and they were almost stifling. Suddenly they beheld flames in
advance; the covered bridge had been set on fire!

"Shall I? Shall I?" cried the eager voice.

"Now then!" shouted the other. "In the name of the holy Trinity!"

"Forward!" almost shrieked the officer in command; but it was in vain.

"_Heisel, cut loose!_" A few quick ringing strokes of an axe were
followed by a thundering crash, as though the very hills were giving
way, and down rushed rocks, trees, and masses of earth, darkening the
air, and the next instant burying the affrighted Saxons in heaps, or
sweeping them down into the river.

Cries of agony and wild despair echoed the next instant through the
defile, mingled with hoarse shouts and the tramp of cavalry. A trooper
dashed madly along the bridge; but before he could gallop over it,
the burning beams gave way under him, and he was swept with them down
the river. Some of the Saxons attempted to force a passage; others
to ascend the rocks; but, weakened in numbers, and daunted by the
formidable nature of the warfare, they finally gave way and retreated
up the valley of the Eisach, while the Tyrolese harassed them with
scattered shots, and finally retired to Brixen.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVI.

THE THIRD VICTORY OF BERG ISEL.


The numbers of the peasantry accumulated during the night. Hofer
and Speckbacher were on the Jauffen, and thousands flocked to their
standard. The rage of the Duke of Dantzic, when he heard of the defeat
of the Saxons in the gorge of the Eisach, was extreme. He refused to
believe the road impassable, and sent Count Arco in a carriage, with
only two outriders, to install himself governor of Brixen. The count
came back more quickly than he went. The duke, foaming with rage,
set out on the foolish journey himself; declaring he would date his
despatches "Botzen" before he was a league out of Innsbruck. "Better
wait till we are there," suggested one of his officers.

He told the innkeeper's wife at Sterzing that "he was going to chew up
the cursed peasants;" but he did not get as far as the Saxons had done.
The rear of his detachment was attacked by a body of Tyrolese with
great fury, and completely routed; they tore the dragoons from their
horses, and killed them with the butt-ends of their muskets. The whole
division dispersed; and the duke made the best of his way to Innsbruck,
which he ignominiously entered, disguised as a common trooper. And thus
his hopes of chewing up the peasantry were, for the season, defeated.

Seventeen hundred Bavarians, advancing from Landeck towards Prutz, with
the design of falling on the rear of Hofer's troops near Sterzing,
were intercepted by a body of Tyrolese, who, after an obstinate fight
of several hours, compelled them to retreat with great loss. At break
of day the peasants recommenced their fire; but, finding the Bavarians
would not answer it, a pause of several hours ensued, at the end of
which the Tyrolese, impatient of inaction, mustered to the number of
about three hundred, armed with pitchforks, pikes, and scythes; and
shouting loudly, precipitated themselves towards the enemy.

The Bavarians, terrified at such formidable and unusual weapons of
war, instantly hoisted a white flag, and unconditionally surrendered.
About nine hundred men and two hundred horses thus fell into the hands
of these three hundred Tyrolese, the rest having fallen or escaped. Of
the peasants, only seven were killed and four wounded. Perhaps it was
on this occasion that they drove their prisoners into a large cavern,
threatening to shoot those who endeavoured to escape.

Thus, without the help of the Austrians, the Tyrolese were successful
in almost every encounter with their enemies; and these successes
inspired them with the most confident hopes of effecting the liberation
of their country.

And now the Tyrolese drew together to fight their third victorious
battle of Berg Isel. Their numbers amounted, at the utmost, to eighteen
thousand, including about three hundred Austrian volunteers; while
the Duke of Dantzic found himself at the head of twenty-five thousand
disciplined troops, with forty pieces of artillery. But his men were
unwilling to fight; the Tyrolese were burning to begin.

Hofer commanded in person, and took up his quarters, as he had done in
May, at the little inn of "the Spade," at Schönberg; where the bed on
which he slept is shown with fond reverence to this day. The right wing
was commanded by Speckbacher, under whom the brave Count Mohr led on
the peasants of the Vintsghan.

Father Joachim came up with the main body during the night; and,
learning where Hofer was, immediately repaired to him.

The tired Sandwirth was soundly sleeping when a vigorous hand shook him
by the arm, and he started up, looking a little bewildered, till he
recognised the Capuchin.

"Is it break of day, father?" said he, rubbing his eyes. "I'm ready."

"Arise, and follow me," said Father Joachim briefly.

Hofer, in some surprise, rose, hastily dressed, girt on his sword, and
mutely obeyed. The Capuchin went out into the open air, looked up a
moment at the stars, and then strode forward without speaking a word.
After a time, they found themselves in a little country churchyard,
with garlands, crosses, and little vessels of holy water over many a
rustic grave. The Capuchin walked on towards a large crucifix; and then
pausing and addressing his companion, said in a low voice, "Let us
pray; but not too loudly, for we are close to the Austrian lines."

The next moment they were murmuring--

  Lord, have mercy upon us.
  Christ, have mercy upon us.
  Lord, have mercy upon us.

Then Father Joachim poured out his soul in prayer and supplication--in
Latin? Oh no!--There are emergencies when the stanchest Roman Catholic
must, if he pray at all, make his petitions in the words that come
first. Father Joachim's were strong and simple.

The action commenced at six o'clock the next morning, August the 12th.

The plan of attack very much resembled that of the 29th of May.

            "The good old plan,
  That they should take who have the power,
  And they should keep who can;"

--in other words, that the Bavarians should take Berg Isel if they
could dislodge the Tyrolese, and that the Tyrolese should not only keep
their own, but drive their enemies completely off the field and make
themselves masters of the bridges and approaches to Innsbruck.

No capital blunder seems to have been committed on either side. For
several hours, the struggle raged with fury. The bridge of the Sill
was contested with great bravery by both sides; but at length the
Bavarians gave way, and were to be seen flying in every direction. The
Tyrolese only had fifty killed and a hundred and thirty-two wounded.
The Bavarians estimated their own loss at five thousand; and seventeen
hundred wounded fell into the hands of their victors. In a few days
the enemy had quitted the country, committing every excess as they
retreated.

On the 15th of August, Hofer, having a third time delivered his
country, made his triumphal entry into Innsbruck. His wife and children
were in a balcony to watch his entry. The old streets echoed with
the continuous tramp of thousands of feet, and the merry peals of
church bells were drowned in the shouts. He looked grave, not elated,
and directed his steps, as before, to the Imperial Church; where,
just before he crossed the threshold, the multitude renewed their
acclamations. He lifted up his hand and finger in admonitory action.

"Hist! Now, prayer; not shouting.--One above--"

These simple words were heard by all. After the service, he proceeded
to the Imperial Palace, which thenceforth became his home while
he remained in Innsbruck. Here, his family, terrified and elated,
clustered round him. He embraced them with emotion, then quitted them
and went out on the balcony, to address the crowd below. And thus, in
simple phrase, he spoke--

"Now, God salute you all, my beloved Innsbruckers! Because you would
have me, whether or no, your Obercommandant, so am I bound to you.
But there are some here who are no Innsbruckers. All that will be my
weapon-brothers, must be ready to fight for God, for our emperor, and
our fatherland, like brave and honest Tyrolese. Those who will not do
that, should rather go directly home. My real weapon-brothers will not
forsake me; neither will I forsake you, so true as I am called Andreas
Hofer. Now I have spoken to you--you have spoken to me: so God preserve
you all."

For the multitude, according to their wont, were so fond of hearing
their own sweet voices, that even these few sentences had been
frequently interrupted by--

"Save you, Hofer! Hurrah!--We're all true weapon-brothers. And those
that are not shall be ducked in the Inn. Long live the Emperor. Hofer
for ever. Hurrah!"

The Sandwirth kept his family with him only forty-eight hours. He had
a very great dread of the allurements of what, to him, appeared a
very luxurious capital. So Anna and Theresa, having strayed about the
city with the children, visited the Hoffkirche, the market, and the
public walks, and enjoyed the female privilege of a little shopping,
contentedly retraced their way home on mules; for there are none but
mule-paths to the Passeyrthal.

And now, certain barons, counts, and colonels in the Austrian service,
who had seen a little of Hofer during the late campaign, amused
themselves greatly by what they termed his "ridiculous" assumption in
taking up his quarters in the imperial palace; and diverted one another
with their imaginations of the banquettings and entertainments he would
give. They quoted the proverb about setting a peasant on horseback,
and made humorous allusions to Sancho in Barataria.

The table-expenses, however, of this gluttonous man and winebibber,
during his abode in the imperial palace, were just one florin a day.
And if his elevation to a post of authority was as unexpected as
Sancho's, his decisions in matters of justice and good order were
as remarkable for plain sense. These, he made known to his loving
countrymen by sundry homely proclamations, which were most exquisitely
relished by the colonels, counts, and barons aforesaid, but taken in
sober earnest by the people for whom they were intended. All these
began with "Beloved country-folk," and "In the name of God, the
Emperor, and the fatherland."

One of them enforced a strict restitution of all unlawfully obtained
property: another prohibited every species of plunder, and enjoined
a better observance of the Sabbath: and directed that taverns and
dancing-rooms should be closed on that holy day. Another dissuaded
from music, except in moderation; another recommended women not to
wear their dresses too low, too scanty, or of too thin materials, (in
all which the fashionable classes flagrantly offended in 'the year
nine,') lest the valiant mountainers should be led astray by their
attractions. All which was delightful to the counts, colonels, and
barons.

But the first proclamation of all could afford no food for ridicule.
It called upon all the inhabitants of the Tyrol to observe a day
of general thanksgiving to Almighty God for blessing their cause
and delivering their country. It need not be said that it met with
universal and devout acceptance.

Truly it seemed as if the day had been won.

Hofer never affected the least departure from the form of government
established in the country by Austria. No step was taken by him
but in the name of the Emperor, which the people gladly obeyed. He
levied taxes to enable him to carry on the war, issued a coinage of
twenty-kreutzer pieces, divided the mountaineers into companies, and,
as far as was in his power, carried the ancient system of government
into effect.

One day, about this time, Hofer was cogitating over a proclamation
to the South Tyrolese, who were taking some little advantage of the
absence of their commander, when one of his lieutenants suddenly
entered, and said abruptly,

"Sandwirth, here's Eisenstecken!"

"I cannot see him," said Hofer, reddening; "he deserted us in our need."

"But he says he _must_ see you--he's very sorry; and he has a special
message from the Emperor; and--in fact, here he is!"

In came Eisenstecken, looking still redder than Hofer; but he walked
straight up to him, held out his hand, and said,

"Don't bear malice, Sandwirth; I did wrong, I own it. I was
faint-hearted, and threw up a good cause as lost--many's the regret it
has cost me! But, come, I have been punished enough!"

Hofer, after a few moments' pause, held out his hand to him, saying,

"I believe you, my lad. Why, every success of ours must have been gall
and wormwood to you! Speckbacher chose the better part."

"He did, indeed, Obercommandant."

"Pish, lad! call me Sandwirth."

"Well, Sandwirth, I am an accredited agent from the Emperor, to express
his sympathy with you, which he shows by sending a golden chain and
medal to be publicly conferred on you, and which you are to wear for
his sake."

Hofer's face glowed with pleasure. To be thus remembered by his
Emperor, and approved by him in the sight of all! It was not the medal
that was so much to him, but what it typified.

It was resolved to connect this expression of the Emperor's approbation
with the celebration of a solemn fast, which was fixed for the 4th of
October. On that day, the Abbot of Wilten performed high mass in the
imperial church of the Holy Cross; the aisles resounded with strains
of heart-rending music, the air was faint with incense; all the pomp
and ceremonial of the Romish Church was invoked to add impression to
the service; and at its conclusion, Hofer, kneeling before the tomb of
Maximilian, surrounded by those armed bronze giants in dread array,
received from the Abbot's hands the testimonial of his sovereign's
favour amid the acclamations of his countrymen. Tears coursed his
cheeks, as he breathed a secret prayer that he might never disgrace
this badge of merit.

Eisenstecken, whose heart had often burned within him of late, at
sundry ridicules of Hofer among those who had failed to support him,
now looked on him as a man who had won a difficult game, and respected
and esteemed him accordingly. Of this he shortly gave a very noteworthy
proof, by requesting a private interview with the Sandwirth, and asking
his concurrence in a purpose he had much at heart. Hofer shook his head
upon it when he learnt its nature, but he spoke with perfect kindness;
and the event was, that Giuseppe was presently seen, extremely well
dressed, riding out of Innsbruck on a little ambling pony.

It was yet early, and the young man rode on to breakfast at Schönberg.
He and his little pony had then five leagues of constant ascent
up the Brenner. After this tough pull, which placed him about six
thousand feet above the majority of mankind, he reached the margin of
the Eisach, which he followed till he came to a romantic little town,
overhung by a picturesque old castle.

Here the pony was knocked up; so the young man, having refreshed
himself by a good dinner, started for the Passeyrthal alone and on
foot, by-paths that he now knew very well.

The call to the cows was resounding through the valley, when he came
in sight of _am Sand_ in the warm glow of the setting sun. He sprang
upon a little knoll, to contemplate it more attentively; and, lo! just
beneath him, on the grass, sat a young girl knitting, while beside her
fed seven sheep and three goats.

"Theresa!" cried he, half doubtfully.

She looked up at him in surprise. The next moment he was beside her.

"Oh, is it you?" and an innocent blush mantled on her cheek. "You bring
news of my dear father?"

"He is well; he sends his dear love to you all."

"Come to the house--my mother will be so glad to see you! She will have
a thousand questions to ask."

"First,--are _you_ glad, Theresa, to see me?"

"Certainly; very glad, indeed! Come in, by all means. I ought to have
driven home the sheep and goats already, but thought I would finish off
my knitting first."

And, collecting her little flock, she alertly led the way to the house;
while Eisenstecken could hardly make up his mind whether to detain her
or not.

"See," said he, offering her a flower, "here's a pretty little thing I
gathered on the mountain."

"Ah, don't touch it!" cried Theresa, shrinking from it in dismay. "It's
the thunder-rose!"

"Thunder-rose!--what's that?"

"Whoever gathers it will be unlucky--whoever accepts it will be
unlucky. Please, throw it away."

"Certainly, I will," said Eisenstecken, looking discomfited, and
flinging it as far from him as he could. "I hope it will not be
verified in my case."

"I hope not. Let us think of something else."

He gladly changed the subject, and talked of what was doing in
Innsbruck; feeling the moment an unpropitious one for saying what was
hovering on his lips.

Anna Hofer welcomed him kindly. There was another person present--a
young, wounded soldier, sitting at the door, whom Giuseppe would fain
have not seen there. It was Rudolf.

Nothing that the house afforded was too good for the adjutant who
brought glad tidings of the Sandwirth. Trout, roast chicken, pastry,
were heaped upon his plate,--the best bed prepared for him, the
best pillow-case and coverlet placed upon it,--all very hospitable
and satisfactory; only--only there was that handsome young soldier,
with his arm in a sling, receiving quieter but quite as flattering
attentions as himself, and exchanging many a soft tone and softer
glance with the smiling Theresa; all of which combined to make poor
Giuseppe fume with jealousy, and kept him awake half the night. A few
hours' dreamless sleep, however, restored him; he sprang up, full of
ardour and self-confidence, and followed Theresa to the fountain. There
he told her--what he had better not have told to any one--for she
was sorry, but steadfast, and confessed to him her heart belonged to
somebody else, and could not be reclaimed.

The young man felt it very bitterly; he would not break bread in
the house again, nor cross the threshold. He trudged back over the
mountain, and when he saw a thunder-rose, he stamped upon it, saying,
"Ah, you wretch! it was owing to you."

At the inn where he had put up, he ate a pretty good breakfast, mounted
his little ambling pony, and prepared to re-cross the Brenner, in a
very bad humour. As luck would have it, he picked up a comrade on
the road, whose cheerful talk beguiled the tedium of the ascent. They
dined together, supped together, slept at Schönberg, and the next day
Eisenstecken had recovered his spirits.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVII.

REVERSES.


In the streets of London, about this time, might be seen two sunburnt
Tyrolese, rather bewildered at the strange sights and sounds around
them, accompanying an Englishman to Lord Sidmouth's office.

Their names were Müller and Schonecher: their errand was soon told, in
earnest, homely phrase. England was the home of the free. England was
rich and sympathetic; the Tyrolese were fighting for liberty, but they
were poor; they could not even muster enough money to buy gunpowder
for their rifles. The present lull could not be expected to last long,
for the enemy were already marching on South Tyrol. Would not generous
England help them?

Of course such a question as this roused the British soul; and the
deputies were received as we are wont to receive the latest comers,
with hospitality and distinction. They were feasted, they were praised,
they were encouraged; but--nothing more was done for them. People
sated their eyes with gazing at them, their ears with hearing them,
and then--one man went to his farm, another to his merchandise; saying
Government should take it up; and Government said it was dangerous, and
thought it had better be done by private subscription. And so, nothing
was done at the time; and when the grant of thirty thousand pounds was
afterwards announced to them by Lord Sidmouth, it was too late--the war
was ended.

The war burst out afresh in October. General Peyri, at the head of six
thousand men, advanced upon Trent, summoning the Tyrolese to lay down
arms. Twelve hundred Tyrolese and Austrians met his advanced guard at
Ampezzo, and were repulsed with great loss. A sharp action took place
at Lavis, in which the French were victors, and many Tyrolese fell; but
they rallied under Eisenstecken, who drove the enemy back to Trent, and
re-occupied Lavis for some time.

A dismal reverse awaited Speckbacher in the pass of Strub, where he was
completely defeated, with the loss of three hundred brave men. His dear
little boy, now just eleven, was hanging over him as he lay terribly
wounded on the field, and trying to suppress the large tears that
blinded him, while he made a kind of _turniquet_ for his father with
his twisted handkerchief, when a French soldier came up, and laid his
hand on the little fellow's shoulder.

"Ah, cruel!" cried Speckbacher, half starting up on his elbow, and
sinking back again as the blood welled from his wounds. "Spare my
child!"

"_Il faut étrangler les petits louveteaux_," replied the captor
hoarsely; and unaware of the value of the wolf he was leaving behind
him, while he dragged away its young.

Speckbacher groaned, and closed his eyes. "Maria!" faintly murmured
he--that name, so sacred to a Catholic, made him feel for his crucifix.
He pressed it to his lips, but could not utter even "ora"--hollow
sounds, like the humming of innumerable bees, rang in his ears; he
became insensible.

When consciousness was restored, he found himself in his own dear home,
with Maria ministering to him. Directly she saw him recognise her, she
began to shed tears; but, like a brave woman as she was, dashed them
away.

"Where's Anderl?" asked Speckbacher faintly.

"I don't know, dear--hanging about somewhere, looking after you--he
will soon find where you are, rely upon it."

Speckbacher _could_ not; he knew more of his fate than she did, but
said nothing. What a heavy day it was to him! He mourned for himself,
he mourned for the men he had lost, he mourned for his country, and he
mourned for his dear little boy, marching to a French prison. He could
talk to his wife of all but the last, but she would not let him--he was
weak from loss of blood, and she insisted on his silence, and on his
hearing her talk to him.

She told him that the Tyrolese, as soon as they saw him cut down,
without being able to rescue him, retreated in disorder to the heights
of Melek, from whence they afterwards fell back to Innsbruck, fighting
as they went; that Rudolf had found him lying insensible, and borne
him off the field, and that Father Joachim had bound up his wounds,
and sent him home in a bändl (or low cart on two fore-wheels), well
cushioned with trusses of straw, and in charge of two men.

When Speckbacher saw her performing her various little domestic duties
thoughtfully, yet cheerfully, and then remembered Anderl, his heart
sank within him.

Maria could not account for the nervous fever that consumed him. His
wounds were well dressed, and she thought he ought to be doing better
than he was.

The next morning, after a dreamy, light-headed night, Speckbacher, in a
half stupor, heard, or seemed to hear, a voice, a little way from the
cottage, somewhere about the stables, say cheerily--

"Hallo! here I am!"

"So I see," grumbled, or seemed to grumble, Zoppel, in return; "what
account hast thou to give of thyself?"

"I've been taken prisoner, and run away. Does any one know anything of
father?"

"Ay, surely; he's ill in bed, as bad as can be."

"Oh, how glad I am that he's at home! I left him all in a bath of
blood. Zoppel!" (in an eager, under-voice,) "has mother fretted much
about me?"

"How should she? She never wist harm had come nigh thee."

"Heaven be praised! Father, then, did not tell her! then, I'll not,
Zoppel. I'm so hungry."

"Go in-doors, boy, bless thee, and get something to eat."

"I think I must." And Speckbacher, whose hearing was quickened by
fever, presently could distinguish the boy's stealthy footsteps in the
adjoining room. Meanwhile, his wife, waking, and leaning over him to
peer into his face, and see how he fared, perceived a bright smile on
his lips, though his eyes were shut.

"You're shamming," said she cheerfully; "what art smiling so about,
Speckbacher?"

"Thoughts of my own," said he, smiling still.

"Come! tell me."

"Look into the kitchen, Maria; I think Anderl has come back."

"Ah, the young rogue, trust him for that!"

She did not dress one bit the faster; and, when she entered the
kitchen, greeted her boy just as usual. He sprang in to his father,
gave him a bright, intelligent look, kissed him, and then laid his head
beside him on the pillow.

"Mother knows nothing," whispered he. "How capital of you, father! Are
you getting better?"

"Yes, dear boy: now you are come home, I shall get well very fast."

He did get well very fast; and was soon up and doing, fighting with the
enemy at Waldrung, where he nearly fell into their hands.

The overwhelming force of France and Bavaria was dispersing the
Tyrolese in every quarter. In the midst of this struggle, in which the
mountaineers were so willingly pouring out their life-blood, Austria
concluded a treaty of peace with France, and the Tyrol was made over to
Bavaria!

Conceive the feelings with which a revolted slave, escaped back to
his native chieftain, would find himself consigned by him to the
slave-dealer again! Conceive, moreover, that the native chief had, in
the first instance, hired the slave to return to him, and had openly or
secretly encouraged him all along!

Eugène Beauharnois published a manifesto, promising the Tyrolese pardon
and peace if they would immediately lay down their arms. In consequence
of this, many hundreds of peasants, stunned at their fate, submitted at
once, while those who still continued in arms were bereft of spirit and
hope.

Hofer, for a few days, was paralysed. He left Innsbruck, now nearly
deserted by his men, and returned to the Passeyrthal, to consider what
was to be done in this strait.

As he approached _am Sand_ by the little winding road among meadows
that nearly passes the church, he heard a loved voice on the other side
of the hedge; and another, neither loved nor lovely, but of unpleasant
quality, alternating with it. They were not close to him, but drawing
nearer, and every word, through the clear air, was distinguishable.

"I don't think so, father."

"You will find it so, daughter. And if Hofer has any sense in his head,
he will do as I say. It is decreed by Providence that the French shall
be victorious; and if he opposes that decree, he will find himself
knocking his head against a stone wall. He might even do this and
welcome, if his own head only were concerned; but when his refusing to
lay down arms, or to call on his countrymen to do so, compromises their
safety, it is nothing short of selfish cruelty."

"Can it be so?" thought Hofer, pressing his hand to his brow, in
painful reflection, as the voices now retired from him. He sat down
under the hedge to try to settle his mind; but he could not. While thus
sadly engaged, his faithful dog flew up to him, and leaping gladly
upon him, prevented him from further reflection; so he rose and walked
towards _am Sand_. Just outside the house stood Theresa, and the
companion he had heard talking with her, a priest,--of a very different
sort from Father Joachim. This man, with whom Hofer had had some
previous acquaintance, had a narrow brow, a cunning eye, and something
subtle in his gait and voice. As for Theresa, it could be seen by a
very slight motion of the back of her neck, that she was displeased
with him, and would not assent to what he said.

"Ah! here's father!" joyfully exclaimed she, as she turned round and
saw Hofer. Running to embrace him, she hastily whispered into his ear,
"Here is a tiresome, cunning French priest, who wants to unsettle us
all."

Hofer's reverence for the church made him give a respectful reception
to Father Donay, who, while supper was preparing, drew him into the
gallery running round the first floor of the house, and there talked to
him long and earnestly.

"Is the soup nearly ready, mother?" said Theresa impatiently.

"Nearly, child."

"Then I shall call them in, for it will be quite ready by the time they
are seated, and I don't like that priest to talk to my father. He's a
bad one!"

"Hush, child!--"

"He _is_, mother, I can tell you.--Father! supper's ready!--"

Hofer came in, looking gloomy, and began unlacing his boots, saying his
feet had swollen. Theresa drew off his boots, and tenderly chafed his
ankles. There was a subdued, glittering light in the priest's stealthy
eye.

"Thou hast lost thy relish, may be, Anderl, for country bread and
cheese," said Anna, smiling.

"When I do, I hope the first mouthful of it will choke me," returned
the Sandwirth, vehemently cutting up the loaf in huge slices.

"Cincinnatus, returned to his plough," observed Father Donay ironically.

"I don't know aught of Saint Senatus," remarked Anna, after a moment's
thought; "is he in our calendar, father?"

"No, my good woman,--no, daughter, no--A good Roman--"

"That's to say a good Catholic, I suppose," said Anna: but the priest
did not answer her--his mouth was full of soup.

Hofer could not get on with his bread and cheese. He sank sorrowfully
back in his chair, and covered his eyes with his hand.

"Take courage, son," said Father Donay; "consider what a noble
sacrifice thou art about to make--"

"What sacrifice?" cried Anna hastily.

"The sacrifice of his will, daughter; the hardest sacrifice man or
woman can make."

"Something more than that," groaned Hofer.

"What's that?" cried Anna sharply. "Your will was always a good
one--why should you give it up?"

"For the good of all--Hist, dear; these are not women's affairs--"

"No, no, better change the subject," said Father Donay.--"Tell me the
meaning of those targets on the wall."

"Boys' playthings, of old, father," said Hofer sadly. "Dangerous ones,
too."

During Father Donay's short stay at _am Sand_, he never ceased urging
on his host the imperative duty, as a Christian patriot, of sacrificing
his own views, interests, and safety to the safety of his countrymen;
and even to place himself in the hands of General Drouet.

Regulus could not have been more willing than Hofer was to devote
himself for the common cause; and, with his judgment obscured by
Jesuitical casuistry, he drew up a proclamation to his countrymen,
advising them to lay down their arms, and consider their cause as lost.

The proclamation was received with despair by Speckbacher; with disgust
by a Tyrolese named Kolb. He, meeting the Sandwirth near Sterzing,
whither he had accompanied Father Donay, and where the unfortunate
proclamation had been penned, hotly remonstrated with him, and declared
his conviction that the document which contained the intelligence of
the peace was a forgery. Hofer was confounded, and hastened home to
re-digest his thoughts; while Kolb proceeded industriously to spread
the impression of the forgery among the other chiefs.

Speckbacher and Rudolf were at _am Sand_, impatiently awaiting him.

"My friend, what is this you have done?" said Speckbacher. "You have
given boldness to the vile and base, and discouraged those who were
ready to die for their country. It matters little whether we and
our weapon-brothers live a few years longer, but it matters a good
deal whether their descendants, generation after generation, shall
be freemen or slaves. You say, 'We cannot maintain war against the
invincible forces of Napoleon.' Who made them so, pray? In the majority
of instances we have not found them invincible, as long as we had
powder and bullets. 'Entirely abandoned by Austria,'--why, so we
have been all the summer, but what success we have had! 'A power of a
superior order guides the footsteps of Napoleon.' O Hofer, Hofer! that
_you_ should write that! It smacks of Father Donay, certainly. 'It is
the immutable decree of Divine Providence which decides victories and
the condition of states.' Doubtless it is, in a large way of speaking;
but Divine Providence takes into account the actions of men possessed
of free will, which it foresees, but does not prevent. And as we have
free will, if those wills are bent on freeing the land, under the
blessing of God, from its enemies, doubtless it _will_ be freed!"

"Speckbacher, you make my heart burn!"

"_Let_ it burn, Anderl. Take up your pen and write something
better--something that will rejoice us."

"I hoped to do this from the first, but feared to bring the blood of my
countrymen on my head--"

"Your countrymen are ready to shed it,--not on _your_ head. Your cause
is the cause of all."

"You are sure I am justified."

"Certain. Write!"

Hofer sat down, flushing deeply; and wrote quickly. The next day the
following proclamation was dispersed among the Tyrolese. Many wept over
it; many rejoiced.

"I felt inclined to lay down my arms, prevailed upon by men whom I
considered friends to my country, but who, as I now have reason to
suppose, are its enemies: I therefore call on you, brethren, to rejoin
me. Were we to surrender to the enemy, we should soon see the youth
of the Tyrol dragged away from their homes, our churches and convents
destroyed, divine worship abolished, and ourselves overwhelmed with
lasting misery. Fight, therefore, in defence of your native country; I
shall fight with you and for you, as a father for his children."

The Tyrolese rose to arms immediately, and the enemy was defeated with
great loss. Generals Rusca and Baraguay d'Hilliers were despatched into
the Pustherthal on the third of November, and on the following day were
gallantly encountered by the Tyrolese, who were, however, driven back.
Rusca eagerly pursued them to Mulbach Clause, where he met with most
determined resistance; and, in his endeavour to penetrate into Hofer's
own valley,--the Passeyrthal,--he was repulsed with the loss of two
thousand men, in killed, wounded, and prisoners.

This warfare raged throughout the month of November, with various
success; but the conquest of the country became inevitable, though the
peasantry might retain possession of particular passes and fastnesses.

Early in December, the struggle was over. The peasantry were
scattered; Father Joachim had escaped to the Grisons; Peter Mayer was
shot; Speckbacher, who was the last to lay down arms, found himself
deserted; Hofer had disappeared.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVIII.

DANGER.


It has been snowing all night. The Passeyrthal is mantled in a garment
of white; at first not thicker than the fleece of a young lamb, but now
ankle-deep; and there is more snow above, ready to fall.

A young girl, with drooping head and careworn mien, is issuing from _am
Sand_ with her milk-pail, and making her way to the cow-house, while
it is yet scarcely day-dawn. Suddenly she stumbled over a man, bending
down to the ground, and so intently engaged in measuring a foot-print
on the snow, as not to have been aware of her vicinity. Instantly her
voice is raised in shrill indignation.

"You pitiful priest! You mean, sneaking man! You may measure that
foot-print as long as you will, for it was not made by father! You
base, wicked Frenchman!--"

"My pretty girl--"

"Call me so again if you dare! Oh, you wretch! it isn't the first time
you've tried the power of your sweet words with me! Caitiff priest!
Some of these days your frock will be pulled off; aye, and your mask
first! Oh, you wicked, wicked man!"

Donay was actually petrified by her objurgations. He slunk away;
but still, with an eye to his original purpose, in the track of the
footsteps he had been measuring. Theresa, white with rage, was standing
like a statue, watching his retreating form, when she found a strong
arm thrown around her, and drawing her into the cow-house. Rudolf was
shaking with suppressed laughter.

"Theresa! let the old hound follow the false scent," said he. "What do
you think I did? I found this fellow lurking about, overnight; so I got
a pair of the Sandwirth's old laced boots, put them over my own, and
trudged right away with them to the edge of a steep bank, where the
snow has drifted to the depth of seven or eight feet! Then I crawled
along to the top of the hedge, without minding scratches, shovelling
the snow about, here and there, so as to leave no track by which I
could be traced, and returned in my own boots. Into that pitfall he'll
go! Ha, ha, ha!--And serve him right!"

"Quite right," said Theresa, between laughing and crying; "but, you
see, he has got the measure of father's foot."

"But that won't hinder his being led astray. And I shall deceive them
all, rogues as they are, over and over again, as you'll see, with this
precious pair of old boots. Two parties of spies have been buried under
avalanches already. And though they go peering and prowling about
every dwelling and outhouse in the valley, asking their sly questions,
'Where's _Sandvird_? when was he last seen?' they always get the same
stupid, indifferent-like answer, 'I don't know.'"

Rudolf drawled this out in such ludicrous caricature, that Theresa
could not help laughing heartily. "But it is too shocking to laugh
about," said she, checking herself with a deep sigh. "Poor father!"

"I am convinced he will escape them, Theresa. He is not a sanguine man;
but when we parted, he said with such steadiness, 'I trust in God,
in my faithful brothers, and in a certain nook in Passeyr,' that I
believed him."

"How did mother bear up?"

"Oh, bravely. We travelled quite silently, for more reasons than one.
Our voices might have been heard--they might have brought an avalanche
down upon us from the Oetzberg--and our hearts were heavy. When we
got to the châlet, however,--(it lies very high up, quite among the
glaciers!) we found it situated in a kind of little kessel,[D] so as
to be very unlikely to be discovered. A thicket of pines shelters it;
there is a little pool or pond near the door; a stable below, a loft
above, in which Johann and I slept--or rather, he whimpered himself to
sleep, but I lay awake, thinking matters over."

"No wonder!--Ah!--" (sighing.)

"Well, I thought it was no good to stay there till it got too light,
especially as it was snowing, which would prevent my retracing our
track if I delayed, and effaced mine along with it if I were quick.
The Sandwirth was serious, but quite calm and hearty. Your good mother
offered me some breakfast, but I would not diminish their little store."

"That reminds me, Rudolf! They will soon be in want of food!"

"Soon, but not just yet. I think we may leave them alone another week."

"Oh, only think if their stock should fall short! Cold, peril, and
famine _too_!"

"Well, then, at the end of this week, which will be in four days, I
will start off with a fresh supply if I _can_."

"If you _can_?"

"Yes, Theresa; remember everything does not depend on me; the weather
may be tempestuous, the search more vigorous and less easily baffled;
but what man _can_ do, I _will_ do, rely upon it."

Theresa rewarded him with a grateful look, and then began to milk the
cow. He stood by her the while.

"How everything has changed, Theresa!"

"Changed _indeed_--"

"_I_ am not changed."

"Nor I."

"The winter, with its snows and its ice-blasts, is not more different
from the summer, with its ripe fruits and sunshine, than the prospects
of the Tyrolese now are, from what they were a few months, even weeks,
ago!"

"No. Still I am glad we tried to free ourselves, though it did not
please God to give us success. We can feel self-respect. Even our
enemies must, I think, reluctantly respect us."

"Not they! Mark you, Theresa: I believe that when people lose
self-respect, they also lose by degrees even the perception of what is
respectable. Sometimes, o' nights, such big, swelling thoughts fill
my head,--I think, 'Surely, what we have done, this Anno Domini Nine,
will _live_? people will talk of it hereafter, when we have long been
dead and buried?' And then I think, 'Ah, no! See how the emperor,--"our
Franzel," as we used fondly to call him, who was most of all beholden
to us, and who put us up to what we did,--'see how he has fallen
off from us, like a snow-drift from the hill-side, that the river
in the ravine below sweeps away for ever! See how it's the fashion
already--how it was the fashion, even while we were winning glorious
victories--for the Austrian counts and barons to look down on us,
with a contemptuous pity, as a set of honest-hearted loggerheads!'--I
say, you sir!" shouted Rudolf, interrupting himself, as he caught the
twinkle of an eye gazing in upon them through a chink between the logs;
and rushing out, he collared the spy, and gave him a good shake.

"Why, how now?" cried the intruder, who proved to be Franz. "What's
this for?--what have I been a doing?"

"Spying and prying," said Rudolf, bluntly.

"Spying and prying?" quoth he. "Why, what have I come this long way
all across the snow for, but to ask after the Sandwirth, and to offer
Theresa a root of the gems-wurz, which, if he eats before sunrise, will
make him bullet-proof? There now!"

And Franz drew himself up like a man aggrieved.

"Thanks," said Theresa, carrying her milk-pail towards the dairy; "but
how am I to get it to him?"

"Oh, _you_ know where he is!" said Franz, insinuatingly.

"No, I don't," said Theresa, who therein, as far as her personal
acquaintance with the locality was concerned, spoke the truth.

"Will you like me to look for him, then?" said Franz, slily.

"No, I should not," answered Theresa, very quickly; adding, "I don't
want you to meddle at all in our affairs."

"Well, certainly, one has not much encouragement to do so, except for
good-will," said Franz, following her into the house, and putting his
cold hands on the stove to warm them; "they're likely to do what I am
doing now--burn their fingers."

Rudolf's mother, who had come to be a companion to Theresa in her
parents' absence, now poured out the porridge, and summoned the family
to breakfast. Theresa said to Franz, "You'll join us, I suppose?" to
which reluctant half-invitation, he replied by drawing a stool to the
table, and taking his share with the rest.

He pricked up his ears to catch any allusion to the Sandwirth, but none
was made. A cloud had settled heavily on them all; but they had already
learnt the needful lesson of silence.

Franz, after lounging about in his usual way, left _am Sand_,
announcing his intention of going to Meran. Before he had proceeded
far, however, some one said "Hist!" and he looked round and saw Donay.

"Well?" said the priest, coming up to him, and walking with him.

"Well," said Franz, "I've been there, and breakfasted there, but to no
good. Theresa wouldn't drop a word that one could lay hold of."

"Ah, there are other things besides words that sharp people can
lay hold of," said Father Donay. "For example, I have laid hold of
something that certifies to me the Sandwirth has been to his house and
from it, within these twelve hours."

"Aye? And yet, father, we've watched that house as a cat watches a
mouse!"

"Pooh, pooh!"

"What's your proof?"

"His footprints, my son. One day, at Innsbruck, when your famous Hofer
was lodging in the imperial palace, he kept me waiting some time. I
left without seeing him; but, before I did so, happening to observe a
pair of his clumsy boots lying on the parqueté floor, which they graced
as well as _he_ graced the palace, I soiled my hands so far as to take
their length and breadth."

"That was far-sighted of you, father!" said Franz, with a kind of
sympathetic admiration.

"Well, I did not know at the time all that might come of it--I merely
amused myself by showing the clumsy proportions to one or two in the
camp; but there must have been something pre-ordained--I was but an
instrument," said this pious priest. "On coming to _am Sand_ this
morning, to look about a little, what should I see but numerous
footprints in the new-fallen snow, different from those of any who
are supposed to be sleeping in the house, namely, women and children.
I dropped on my knees, and--_measured them_! they were Hofer's!
I afterwards tracked them across the pastures, full half a mile,
till--plump!--into the snow I sank till it was above my head!"

Franz burst out laughing, and suddenly stopped short, as he saw Father
Donay turn red with wrath.

"You are rude to laugh," said the priest, with displeasure. "I nearly
lost my life, I can tell you! When I floundered out, I found so many
foot-tracks that I got confused, and could make none of them out to be
Hofer's; yet, whoever it was who had walked up to that spot, must have
turned back or gone on, unless, indeed, they could have been smothered
in the snow."

"Which he may have been, in the darkness of night," cried Franz.

"Well, I think not; he might have floundered about as I did," said
Father Donay. "Life is equally dear to us all, I suppose.--So, now I
leave it to you to find where he is, whether there or anywhere else;
and, when you do, you know your reward."

"Well, I can't say I like this job," cried Franz, after a pause. "Do
you know, father, in a miracle-play, I once played Judas--"

"Well, you've only got to play Judas again," said the priest, with a
sinister smile.

"What, and _hang_ myself?" cried Franz, hoarsely. "Why, father, what is
it you are asking me?"

"You fool!" cried Father Donay, in a rage, "the cases are not parallel:
your allusion is blasphemous. Let me hear no more of it, I pray."

Franz walked on, silent and astounded, doubting which of them were the
wickeder man. "The Sandwirth," resumed he, at length, with a choke in
his voice, "has never done me a wrong--on the contrary, nothing but
good. It is only Theresa--"

"Ah, if you can put up with that girl's scorn, you can put up with
anything," said Father Donay contemptuously.

"I _can't_ put up with it, and won't!" cried Franz; "but it's making
her pay pretty dearly, too, if her father gets shot."

"Don't be such a dolt as to suppose it," said Father Donay pacifyingly;
"the worst he and she will get is a good fright. He will be tried by
court-martial; probably acquitted, or reprimanded, or sentenced to a
short imprisonment, from which, at Austria's intercession, he will be
released."

"If I were sure of that--" said Franz, hesitating.

"Why, don't you know I speak with authority? You know my credentials
pretty well," said Father Donay. "I have all but told you who empowers
me--"

"And you have promised me absolution, if any unforeseen evil comes of
it--" said Franz, still uneasily.

"How should I do otherwise, my son? I will promise it twenty times, if
that will make it any stronger."

"No, no--of course it will not. Well, then, I'll think about it,
father: and--"

"And, if somebody else should do it while you are only thinking about
it, he'll get the reward instead of you."

"That won't suit me at all!" cried Franz. "Why, if I make up my mind
to do an ill turn, I may as well do it as not; the sin--that is,
the--whatever it is, will be the same--"

"The intention, but not the reward," said Father Donay. "Heaven notes
our intentions; man only notes works."

"I wish I were fairly out of _this_ work," exclaimed Franz. "If
Theresa, now, were to come across me at this moment, she might overcome
me with a straw!"

"Truly, I believe you!" said Father Donay, with ineffable scorn; "and
men of straw, or men knocked down by straws, are not the men _we pay_."

"Ah!" cried Franz, grinding his teeth, "if you were not a priest, I
should think some evil spirit was within you."

"And I, without any if," coolly replied Donay, "think an evil spirit
_is_ within you--the spirit of irresolution. Come! no more of this
child's play. Are you going to throw away a cup of good milk because
there's a cow-hair in it?"

"Not I," cried Franz recklessly. "Nothing venture, nothing have. Give
me a fortnight, and I'll hunt him up. When I was keeping the herds up
the mountains this summer, I made myself pretty well acquainted with
all the nooks and corners of 'em; and I guess the man we are after to
be in a certain châlet in a certain spot that I chanced upon one day,
when I was seeking for cream o' the moon."

"Cream o' the moon, indeed!" repeated Father Donay, ironically.
"Well--if you find him, and enable us to find him, that will be better
than moonshine."

"But, father! if I find him, and point out to you the place where he
is, you may find him yourselves. I wash my hands of taking him."

"Wash your hands by all means. We'll take him."

"Very well--that's to be all, then?"

"All, and enough."

"Just so. Good bye then, father--here we are at St. Martin--"

"_Benedicite_, my son."

The place of Hofer's concealment, a picturesque little
cow-house--nothing better--was about twelve miles from his home, among
the glaciers of the Oetzthal, near the Timbler Joch, and in a position
that, for many months of every year, the snow made quite inaccessible.
The winter of the Year Nine, however, was comparatively mild; and the
châlet might be reached with considerable fatigue, difficulty, and
danger.

At the door of this cow-house, then, stood the man who--we will not
say had strutted his little hour on life's stage, for Hofer had never
endeavoured to ape a grandeur that he had not; he was a plain, simple,
upright man from first to last. He had attained a great, though brief
power, and had not abused it: he had fallen from it, but not into
despair.

In the profound loneliness and inaction of his present life, after so
stirring a campaign, there might have been a chance of his mind preying
on itself, had it not been for the constant sense of danger. His heart
did not indeed prey on itself, but feed on itself it did. He mused much
on his late career, and on the anxious question, had he been wasteful
of human life or not? At this moment, he was reading, for the twentieth
time, a letter which had found its way to him even in this secluded
spot--it was from the emperor himself--the beloved Franzel! strenuously
urging him to leave his desolate retreat and take refuge in Vienna,
and pledging his imperial word for his safety. Yes, this plain, homely
man had thus been sued by his sovereign, and had refused. He would not
forsake his family or his country.

His faithful wife had accompanied him, as in love and duty bound,
feeling her home to be under whatever roof sheltered the head of her
husband. She had her distaff and knitting; and as they sat among the
trusses of hay chattering of this and that, many a simple wile did
the good woman successfully use to lure her Anderl's thoughts from
anxious themes. Now, it was to explain some family genealogy, some
intermarriage she professed nearly to have forgotten--then, when he
had wondered how she could be so forgetful, she would branch off
into correlative domestic histories, harmless jests, recollections
of wedding-feasts, baptisms, and burials; then, broach some knotty
point, or ask him to recall some old legend or fairy-tale, or local
superstition.

Hofer had brought Johann with him partly out of fondness, and to amuse
Anna, partly lest he should be seized as hostage; and partly because he
knew the little fellow to be without reticence, and as likely to betray
him from heedlessness as an enemy might be from mischief.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIX.

WINTER ON THE MOUNTAINS.


On the 22d of January, about two hours before dark, Theresa and
Rudolf's mother were busily packing a basket with as much as it would
hold.

"When they started, there were four of them," observed Theresa, "and
they carried four times as much as can be carried by one; therefore
their provisions would last four times as long as they will now, so
we must send them the oftener. Meanwhile, they shall have as much as
Rudolf can carry. Here's room for a bit of soap: and here's a corner
into which I can squeeze a cake for Johann. The brandy--the oil--the
bacon--the loaves--the dried chamois,--do you think you can carry
anything more, Rudolf?"

Rudolf lifted the burthen, and pronounced it "no weight at all."
"However," added he, "there's some difference in a burthen on a level
floor like this, and dragging one down the side of a mountain too steep
to scale, except in _crampons_; so I think it will do."

"Just this one cheese more, Rudolf."

"Very well. I think that will do."

"Is it not rather too early to start yet?"

"It would be safer, in some respects, to wait longer; but, considering
the distance, and other things, I might fail of reaching the châlet if
I put it off later."

"Yes, yes. Oh, Rudolf! believe me, I know full well the great dangers
you are encountering for my poor parents--"

"Don't name it, Theresa. Even if you were no ways related to them,
think you I would not do it for the sake of Hofer?"

"Surely, surely!" cried his mother. "My boy speaks well; but yet,
Theresa, I think it were better to go twice, than go overburthened and
meet some evil by the way."

"Rudolf," said Theresa, "you will laugh at what I have prepared for
you; but see! here is a loose white garment, with a hood, to cover
you quite up, which, if you put on when you reach the mountains, will
enable you to cross the snow undiscerned."

"Excellent!" said Rudolf, arraying himself in it, to make sure how it
looked. "I shall certainly find it useful."

Theresa rolled it up into as small a compass as possible.

"And here are a few lumps of sugar, Rudolf: put one in your mouth when
you reach the glaciers--"

"You make too much of me," said he, tenderly.

"And now," said his mother, "let us kneel down and pray."

With an atmosphere of sanctity about him, and a heart full of good
purposes, the young man cheerily started on his perilous mission. It
was yet light; but as long as he kept among villages and cottages,
there was nothing in a man's trudging along, openly carrying a basket.
Once or twice, when he fancied a suspicious eye rested upon it, he
cried gaily, "I hope you expect as good a dinner to-morrow as I do!"
and began whistling.

At length, after a walk of about six miles, he found himself rising
above the haunts of men, though not beyond their observation. He now
enveloped himself in the white garment, which covered his burthen as
well as himself, put a lump of sugar in his mouth, and pursued his way
over the frozen snow; looking like a snow-wreath himself. Suddenly he
perceived footprints in various directions.

"Some one has been here lately," thought he: "this outer crust has not
long been crushed. Yet who, without a purpose, would be here but the
wolf or bear?"

Turning the angle of a rock, he ran against a man, who uttered a
shriek, and sprang backwards, throwing out his hands, and exclaiming--

"Avaunt, spirit of the mountain!"

Rudolf, instantly perceiving that his extraordinary costume had
made him mistaken for something supernatural, would have seized his
advantage by rushing past with a flourish of his arms, and a wild,
terrific cry; but unfortunately his white drapery fell off.

"Why, it's Rudolf!" exclaimed Franz, relieved.

"Franz!" cried Rudolf, in alarm and displeasure. "What are you about
here?"

"What are _you_ about, you mean?" retorted Franz. "One question's as
good as another. To whom are you carrying that basket?"

"That's no matter of yours!"

"I _know_. You can have but one object, and that's to go to the
Sandwirth."

"Look ye, Franz," said Rudolf, boiling over with rage, and setting
down his burthen: "this won't do to go any further. Who are you, to
interfere with my objects, whatsoever they may be? We'll have it out
on this spot. I've got on my wrestling-ring;" exhibiting a very thick
silver ring on the little finger of his right hand; "and, if you choose
to persist in this matter, we'll try a fall together, and I'll pitch
you afterwards into the bottomless lake."

As Rudolf suited the action to the word, by flourishing his fists and
bounding towards him, Franz stepped aside in affright. He knew that the
loss of an eye, an ear, or a nose, often resulted from these national
combats; and his fear of Rudolf's prowess was such, that nothing
short of death, to his belief, would ensue to him if he accepted the
challenge. As for the bottomless lake,--which was a sullen piece of
water in a neighbouring basin, reported to be fed by no springs and
have no outlet for its waters; to be uninfluenced by the winds, and,
when affronted by having anything cast into it, to blow up little
tempests and thunder-storms of its own,--Franz had a profound horror of
it, and was at this moment very unwillingly detained in its vicinity.

Therefore, succumbing before Rudolf at once, he querulously cried--

"Saints alive, man! what are you dreaming of? Who wants to be pitched
into the bottomless lake? Not I, for one, I can tell you, this cold
weather; and as for wrestling, I hope there are better ways of warming
one's self than that. I don't care where you're going, not I,--rather
you than me, on a January night! You take your course, and leave me
alone to take mine; the mountain's free to us both, I suppose." Saying
which, he walked off very fast.

Rudolf was terribly vexed. He was pretty sure that Franz was hunting
for the Sandwirth, and on the right track, and would probably return
and ferret it out. After a few minutes' painful thought, he resolved
not to be instrumental to it, if he could help it; and therefore went
considerably out of his way, in order that his footprints might lead
Franz astray, if he endeavoured to follow the trail.

The worst of it was, that Rudolf thus lost not only time, but his way
also. A good deal of snow had fallen since his former expedition, and
altered the aspect of the ground, making that appear solid which was
unsubstantial, and creating mounds and hillocks out of snowdrifts.
Besides, it was growing dusk, and the worst part of his journey lay
before him. He thought he recognised a rock, which he might reach by
cutting across what looked like an inclined plane. All at once, he
felt the snow give way beneath him--he sank with great swiftness into
an abyss of great depth, and profoundly dark. He was not hurt--merely
shaken by his fall; but his perturbation was extreme, and his first
thought, be it said to his praise, was not of himself, but of Hofer.
He would be starved to death! Who would ever know, till too late, that
Rudolf had never reached him?

The extremity roused him. He began to grope about with his hands, but
could feel nothing but rough stones, and, here and there, what felt
and smelt like bones. Moving a little onward, he perceived a small
speck of white afar off, which, it struck him, was daylight. His eyes,
now getting accustomed to the intense darkness, could discern even the
faint twilight which, through some fissure, thus attracted him. He
cautiously advanced, found his prison resolve itself into some sort of
deep cavern; and, advancing to its mouth, saw it guarded by two huge
bears! They were looking forth from the cave, without moving, which
gave him time to decide on his course before they saw or scented him.
Hastily enveloping himself anew in the white garment, and securing his
precious basket to him by his red sash, he took a large stone in each
hand, and, uttering a fearful yell, rushed from his retreat, extending
his white drapery high above his head.

The bears, who certainly had never beheld such an apparition before,
moved off in seeming trepidation; and soon, mending their pace into a
clumsy trot, retreated into a neighbouring ravine.[E]

Rudolf, right glad to have dispersed his foes, wandered on amid
enormous masses of variously tinted glaciers,--some deep blue, others
sea-green, others dirty yellow,--resounding with the hollow roar of
unseen waters; and here and there he encountered the dead bodies
of stags, and other animals, not in a state of decomposition, but
preserved by the cold in a shrivelled condition, like mummies.

Presently the path became a mere shelf, and, turning abruptly,
disclosed a wide reach of valley at a tremendous depth beneath.

An Englishman's head might have spun, but Rudolf began to scramble
upwards by what might be called some giant steps; and as these
occasioned him one or two ugly slips, he coolly took off his boots,
cut his feet with a flint, and let the blood flow from them, that
its stickiness might enable his feet to adhere to the rock with more
tenacity.

He was presently stopped by a broad and deep ridge of snow, which he
found, on sounding, was likely to prove as infirm as that which had
deposited him in the bears' cavern. But the trickling of water beneath
the ice had made a crevice between the rock and the snow-bank; and
along this Rudolf squeezed himself sideways, till he emerged at the
foot of a glacier, dirty yellow without, but blue as lapis lazuli
within. He painfully climbed another ridge by a zigzag course, and on
through a wild glen of dripping, dreary rocks; while the fitful wintry
blasts, sounding like the flappings of mighty wings among the crags,
alone broke the awful silence.

Night was closing round him; he took many false steps, and repeatedly
sank in snow to his waist. He was beginning to feel something like
despair, when, lo! in a little rocky cup just below him, there lay the
châlet of Hofer!

He could not resist giving a glad hurra and a cheerful whistle, pretty
sure that only the right people would hear him. The next minute, he was
at the door, giving the concerted signal; and it was instantly opened
by Hofer, with his wife peering anxiously over his shoulder, and Johann
pressing closely to her side.

"Rudolf, my dear lad!" cried Hofer, embracing him. Anna embraced him
too; and Johann, seeing the basket of provisions, began to cry with joy.

"Fie, Johann!" said his mother, cheerfully; "we are going to have a
merry feasting, after all! Only think, Rudolf, this silly child thought
we were going to starve!"

"A likely thing we would let you!" cried Rudolf. "Why, I'd eat my
own fingers first. Come and see what a heap of good things there are
in this basket Johann! Here are some sausages, to begin with; and a
seasoned pie; and cheese--oh, what a cheese!"

"That's famous!" said Johann, hungrily; while his mother sought to
appease him by immediately giving him something to eat.

A miserable little oil-lamp twinkled in the corner of the stable; there
was a cattle-trough, plenty of hay and straw,--nothing more.

"And how goes it with you, Sandwirth?" said Rudolf, seizing his hand,
as soon as he had secured the door.

"As well as may be, boy. A little down, of course, now and then, with
so much leisure for thinking of the troubles I helped to bring on our
poor country."

"Never think that, I pray you, Sandwirth! You tried to bring us out
of them--and _did_. It was only that we were deserted by our natural
liege-protectors."

"Well, lad, don't speak against the powers that be. If God had meant us
to prosper, we should have done so. His ways are hidden; but they're
always good. And our Franzel has written me a noble letter--"

"The Emperor!--_has_ he?" cried Rudolf.

"Aye, that he has," said Anna, leaving the basket to fetch the lamp;
"do show it to him, Anderl."

"Why, how on earth did it reach you?"

"Eisenstecken knew this place," said Hofer. "He's at Vienna now, and he
sent the letter here by a trusty hand--one who knew the mountains." As
he spoke, he drew the letter from his bosom, and placed it in Rudolf's
hand.

"Amazing!" said Rudolf, eagerly running through it, while Anna held the
lamp to enable him to read. "Why, what prevents your accepting it?"

"What should make me accept it?" returned Hofer. "What should such an
one as I do at Vienna? No, no!--where the tree was planted, there let
it fall. My country has been much to me, and I've no mind to desert my
country."

"Your countrymen burn to secure your safety. Dear Sandwirth, reconsider
this!"

"My sole thought," said Hofer, calmly laying his hand on the young
man's shoulder, "is how to make a good end."

Rudolf looked wistfully at him. He thought he seemed worn and wasted by
anxiety and abstinence, and his heart ached for him.

"Come," said he, gaily, "let us have some supper before we talk any
more of these matters. I'm hungry enough, I can tell you; and I have
plenty of news of one sort and another."

"First about the dear children," said Anna, eagerly. "Theresa--"

"Theresa is an angel," said Rudolf, hastily. "My mother says she never
knew any one to come up to her--so thoughtful, and yet so tender."

"Aye, that's just Theresa," said Hofer; "and a good daughter, Rudolf,
will make a good wife, I fancy."

"Sandwirth! you won't go from your word?"

"A likely thing I should," said Hofer, heartily.

"Come, let's drink to her," said Rudolf, anxious to get Hofer to take
some of the sustenance he so much needed.

A couple of horn cups were filled with brandy tempered with water,
and handed round. Cold as the weather was, there was no fire; but they
kept themselves warmly stowed among the trusses of hay. In a little
while, they grew quite genial. Anna plunged the only knife into the
savoury pie, and dispensed its contents. Rudolf told all the news and
gossip he could think of, which was listened to with avidity by Anna,
and rewarded by many a short laugh from the Sandwirth. Johann lay along
on the straw, eating as if he never would be satiated, hearing all,
and saying nothing,--quite content with the present moment, especially
when, in honour of old customs, Rudolf sang a ballad, and the Sandwirth
told a fairy-tale. The story was this:--

 "A young man, who had a fine cherry-tree, laden with fruit, in his
 garden, had the fruit stolen year after year by the fairies. Not
 guessing who were the thieves, and anxious to detect the culprits, he
 one year strewed the ground all round about the cherry-tree with fine
 ashes, that he might see the pillagers' footprints. Now, the 'little
 folk,' though a beautiful race, have ugly little webbed feet, of which
 they are much ashamed; for which reason they wear very long garments.
 Well, the next morning, the young man got up, and went out to examine
 the cherry-tree, which he could see at a glance had been stripped
 during the night. On examining the ashes, he found them covered with
 the impressions of little webbed feet, as if a flock of geese had
 crossed them. He guessed the fairies to be the thieves; and they were
 so angry with him for detecting them, that, though they robbed his
 garden no more, his cherry-tree never bore fruit again."

Hour after hour, they continued talking; till Johann, unable to keep
his eyes open any longer, crawled up to his straw-bed in the loft,
which Rudolf was to share with him.

Rudolf, now that his friend was strengthened and refreshed, referred to
the Emperor's letter, and earnestly pleaded with him that the offer of
protection should be accepted. He dwelt on the state of Europe,--as far
as anything was known of it in the Tyrol,--on the little probability
there was that any good would result from continuing to hold out, or
from awaiting another rising.

"The spring will come, and find you just where you are," continued he,
"unless some degrees worse off. You will have no resource but to accept
the Emperor's offer; for every old ruin of a castle in the Tyrol will
continue to be garrisoned with French and Bavarian soldiers, who will
have so little to do, that their commanders will pursue the search
after you, by way of keeping them out of idleness. So, why not give in
at once, when you may slip out of the country more safety than when
the mountain passes can be again used by other than mountaineers? Your
country, your religion demand that you should not throw away a life
that may yet be eminently useful; and common sense shows that the most
prudent care to take of it will be to quit the Tyrol."

"Ah, yes, listen to him, Anderl!" said Anna, earnestly; and the two
argued and persuaded, till at length Hofer gave way, and consented
to write to the Emperor, accepting the protection he had so lately
declined, and asking for an escort.

Rudolf undertook to speed this missive to Vienna; and after some
further talk, which carried them far into the night, he repaired to
the loft, where he soon lay in dreamless sleep. The following morning,
after another domestic council, and innumerable kind messages and
promises exchanged, he, with hearty farewells, sped on his homeward
route before it was yet light.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XX.

THE CHÂLET.


A few hours after Rudolf had gone, Hofer was standing at the door of
his hut, when he thought he saw a dark object stealthily moving among
the firs. At first he took it for some animal of prey, but his next
impression was that it was a human creature on all fours; and, as he
had certainly been himself seen, he thought he lost nothing by rushing
out on the intruder.

A man, creeping along under an ox-hide, started up, and proved to be
Franz.

"What do you here?" cried Hofer.

"Why, Sandwirth, can that be you?" said Franz, in seeming astonishment.
"Why, how you surprise me! How are you?--How altered you are, to be
sure!"

"Very likely, Franz; but the question is, what brought you here to seek
me?"

"Nothing brought me--how should I guess where you were?" returned
Franz, hardily. "I came to look for a strayed calf."

"Well--I've sought for a strayed calf too, in my time, but never up
this high in deep winter, nor yet on all fours with an ox-hide over me.
Franz!--now, don't tamper with an old friend. I've oft had dealings
with you, and I've done you many a kindness. You know, my lad, I'm in
jeopardy, and you know that if you say where I am, you will get me into
trouble--"

"What matter is it of mine?" grumbled Franz. "What good would it do me?"

"As to the _real_ good it would do you, I think you would get none; but
as to a handful of zwanzigers, I dare say they would give you so much,
for the price of your old friend's blood."

"Don't talk in that way, Sandwirth," said Franz, whiningly. "Poor as I
am,--and I'm very poor,--I hope I'm not so bad as you think me."

"Well, Franz, as to poor, you have made a good deal of money in your
time; and it has always been your way to be with full pockets one day
and empty ones the next--"

"But they're _always_ empty now, Sandwirth, for I can't do a stroke of
business, and my mother's dead, and my sister's married to Karl Hoven,
and Karl won't speak to me; so that I'm really what one may call _in
want_."

"Well, boy, well--the case is hard, I grant ye: but bad as it is,
you'll make it worse if you take to evil courses. Go to Nicolas Wagner
at Botzen--tell him that the last time you saw me, I bade you go to him
and say I hoped he would give you some employment. And be mum--do you
observe?--as to when that was. Stay, here are a couple of dollars--it's
but little I have myself, and I shall perhaps need them shortly, as
much as yourself; but you shall have them. Now, go; and forget where or
when you have seen me; and according as you are faithful to your old
comrade, may your worldly affairs prosper."

Franz looked sheepish, made a movement of his hand towards Hofer's,
drew it back, and crept off. Even his gait was that of a caitiff.

"How altered the Sandwirth is!" mused he--"his hair, that was raven
black, is now half grey; his beard looks as if it hadn't been trimmed
for a month. His face is full of lines and furrows, and he is very
thin. Why, he isn't half the bulk he was!--very likely, knows pretty
well what it is to want victuals. Well, so do I; and when a man wants
victuals, it makes him ready to do things that he wouldn't think of
doing when full fed. Why now, these two dollars will keep me four days,
I'll say--they won't keep me longer, because, this cold weather, I must
drink as well as eat. At the end of that time, I must starve, unless
through Father Donay; for, as to Nicolas Wagner of Botzen,--no, I
thank ye! I'm as good a fellow as he; I won't work under him! Still,
I can't be too hard upon the Sandwirth--I'll give him a fair start.
He dropped that perhaps he should soon be as much in want of dollars
as myself. Now, as he can't spend them on the mountain-top, that must
intimate that he means soon to leave it--very likely, now that he has
taken alarm at me, he'll steal off this very night. All the better for
us both, if he does. Because all I engaged for, to Father Donay, was to
find out where he was. I've done that, and I can lead to the spot; but
if, when they reach it, the steed is gone and the stable empty,--why,
that won't be _my_ fault, I say. Besides, they may soon make out his
track and follow it; but meanwhile, my part in the business will be
done. Well, but I won't do it while the Sandwirth's money is keeping
me in bread. No, no; I'll give him his chance while it lasts, and I'll
make it last four days--that will be hon ... hum!--I won't go a-near
Father Donay the while, or I shouldn't make it last so long, and he'd
get the secret out of me too soon--No, no."

At this instant, Franz--who, while his mind was thus pre-occupied,
had unwittingly followed the path by which Rudolf had gone to the
châlet instead of that by which he had returned from it--suddenly came
upon the two bears, who instantly pursued him; and in his hurry and
affright, he was precipitated down a steep acclivity, down which he
pitched over and over, till he found himself several hundred feet below
his shaggy enemies, bruised and breathless, but not seriously hurt.

The search which was being made for Speckbacher, all this time, was
quite as vigorous as for Hofer. Minute descriptions of his person and
dress were published, large rewards offered for his apprehension; and
every nook and corner eagerly searched for him by cruel and greedy
enemies.

Speckbacher, on separating from his comrades, had first concealed
himself in the little mountain hamlet of Dux; but his retreat being
discovered, he was obliged to retire from the haunts of man, and was
hunted from place to place, till at length he found refuge in heights
hitherto deemed inaccessible save to the eagle and vulture. Here he
underwent incredible sufferings from cold, hunger, and fatigue; but his
indomitable nature made him prefer it to submission to the enemy.

When Hofer returned to his châlet after the encounter with Franz, his
wife observed, "I really do think, Anderl, it is now time you should
cut off your beard. It makes you unlike everybody else; and, therefore,
easily recognisable at a distance; whereas, should a spy to whom you
were personally unknown, find his way up here, you, without your beard,
might easily persuade him you were somebody else."

"No, that would be the hardest thing in the world to me," said Hofer.
"He might deceive himself about me; but I could not deceive him.
Whenever a man has put to me the question, 'Are you Hofer?' I have
never yet said 'No;' and I cannot begin now."

Anna was going to remonstrate; but he smiled rather sadly at her and
said--

"It would be to little good, dear--we are already discovered by Franz."

Here Johann burst into a loud fit of crying, and flung himself on the
straw; while Anna stood speechless.

"We had better go somewhere else, then," said she, after a moment.

"Where? We dare not descend into the valleys; and if we stray about the
mountains, Rudolf will not know where to find us, and we shall perish
with hunger. Patience, dear wife! Rudolf may come again in a few days,
and we can then concert fresh measures with him; or the emperor's
safeguard may arrive in the meantime, and we can then avail ourselves
of it."

"Ah, I hope we shall!"

"No doubt of it. Cheer up, Johann! Perhaps you will be staring at the
pretty things in the shop-windows of Vienna in another fortnight. Come
here, and see me carve this horn, and I'll tell you a story about what
I used to do when I was a little boy."

While Hofer amused this wayward little son with one story after
another, rewarded therein by beguiling himself of his own heavy
thoughts, Anna stood musing, with her eyes wistfully fixed on her
husband's rifle.

"It has brought down many a man in battle," thought she; "and why not
now, if spies come lurking about him to make a prey of him? He would
not do it, I know; but, I declare, if I espy any one prowling about
that has no business here, I'll see if I can't manage to hit him
myself!"

Just four evenings after his previous visit, Rudolf reappeared. He did
not think their provisions could fall short yet; but he was anxious
about Franz, and he thought Hofer and his wife wanted cheering up, and
would be glad to know the message to the emperor was already on its
way; so he started with a fresh-filled basket.

This time he met with no interruptions, and had a prosperous journey;
he had also the comfort of finding his friends cheerful and hopeful.
They talked about his marriage with Theresa in the spring; the
household goods they would start with and those which they must
provide; and many a sage maxim of thrifty housewifery did Anna repeat
and Hofer laugh at, and Rudolf promise to bear faithfully in mind. The
evening, as usual, concluded with prayer. Hofer was now in the habit of
praying extempore and with great fervour, after the usual offices of
the church; and Anna was wont to go over her beads very devoutly, after
which they all joined in singing several simple hymns of a great many
verses, and then lay down for the night.

Rudolf, as usual, slept with Johann in the loft. He was tired with his
journey, and the evening had altogether been more satisfactory than he
expected; yet, somehow, he could not settle to sleep. The conversation
respecting his marriage had been too interesting and exciting to enable
him to compose himself; add to which, he had a vague fear of some evil
impending over the Sandwirth, for which he seemed to have no need.

When he slept by snatches, it was to dream painfully: of Theresa being
borne from him by Franz over crackling ice, beneath which they both
disappeared--of bears growling over her remains--of the emperor's
escort coming too late--of Hofer's hut being attacked at dead of
night--of the air ringing with the sharp reports of rifles--of his
throwing himself between Hofer and Franz. Rudolf awoke with a start;
and smiled to hear Johann talking in his sleep and saying, "Some more
soup, mother." Then he lay wakeful, but still, till day began to break,
when his quick ear became aware of the measured tread of many men over
the snow. Springing to his feet, he shouted to Hofer below,--"The enemy
are on us!" and leapt from the loft-window to the ground, followed
by the dizzy Johann, when both were immediately seized and bound.
The châlet was encircled by sixteen hundred French soldiers, come to
capture one unfortunate man.

The next instant, the châlet-door was opened from within; and there
stood the mild Hofer, in his red waistcoat and green jacket, with the
medal round his neck; his dark eye calmly looking around. His was the
first voice that broke the thrilling silence.

"Speaks any one among you German?"

The commandant, Captain Renouard, here stepped forward, accompanied by
a gendarme, and said, hurriedly--

"Are you Andreas Hofer?"

"I am."

The clear voice rang through the air. Turning to his wife, Johann, and
Rudolf, he said,--"These have offended in nothing; let them not be
bound."

Then, addressing those whom he loved so deeply, he said--

"Pray, and be steadfast. Suffer with patience: so will your sins be
forgiven."

Their bonds were not unloosed, and Hofer was heavily chained hand and
foot. Captain Renouard entered the châlet for a moment, looked around,
shrugged his shoulders, saw the noted rifle standing in the corner, and
brought it out.

"This is a clumsy piece, after all," said he, handing it to the
gendarme, after surveying it somewhat curiously. "Take care! it's
loaded!" dodging it in some alarm, as the gendarme handled it
carelessly. It would have been singular if he had been shot by Hofer's
rifle, after all--the rifle that Hofer would not fire in his own
defence.

The word of command was given; the troops closed around the prisoners,
and began to descend the mountain. Hofer trod as firmly as when the
master of Innsbruck. Anna's face was smeared with tears; but she was
too proud to sob, and chide Johann for crying. Rudolf's heart beat
wildly. He looked on every side for Franz; but Franz, having brought
the party to the verge of the hollow, had prudently decamped with
Father Donay, to enjoy such peace of mind as his conscience would
permit.

On approaching a village, the French band struck up a lively strain
of music, which nearly drove Anna out of her senses; and with loud
huzzas, they proclaimed to the people who came rushing from their
cottages, that they had captured the famous "General _Sanvird_; le
fameux _Birbone_." They were answered with tears, maledictions, and
lamentations. Though not permitted to approach the prisoners, the
villagers kept up with them, crying aloud in voices that the musicians
could not drown--

"Never mind, Sandwirth! They'll bring vengeance on their own heads,
Sandwirth! Keep a good heart! They won't dare to touch you! We'll
never, never forget you!"

And this in every town and village through which they passed.

On reaching Meran, they were joined by the weeping Theresa. She had
been seized and bound at _am Sand_, and the house plundered. The two
little girls had escaped and taken refuge with Rudolf's mother.

The only consolation of the unhappy family was that they were together;
but at Botzen they were sundered. Here they were received with more
courtesy and kindness by General Baraguay d'Hilliers than had yet been
accorded them. He would not triumph over a fallen foe, but received the
brave and unfortunate captive with a soldier's frankness. He affected
to be indignant at his chains, ordered them instantly to be struck
off, and appointed him and his family a tolerably commodious prison,
where they were treated with as little rigour as was consistent with
their safety. Here they enjoyed the last snatch of unrestrained family
intercourse they were destined to have on earth; it was embittered from
many sources, but yet it had its sweetness. Their friends also had
access to them; and many of the townspeople of Botzen came to express
their sympathy,--of whom Hofer asked forgiveness for anything they
might have to impute to him; but he was only answered by their tears.
The French officers, also, did all in their power to show, by their
attentions, their sense of the kindness exceeding mere humanity which
he had always shown his prisoners.

Some of them were surprised to behold the serenity of his countenance,
as he conversed with his family, and gave them various directions
concerning affairs small as well as great. There seemed no end to the
people to whom he charged them to give messages of kind remembrance;
often with some allusion to this one's wedding, or that one's illness,
which showed that his head was quite clear enough to keep in view their
minute affairs.

At length the hour of parting came, the last embrace was given, the
last kiss taken, though not the last tear wept, by many; when he
consigned his wife and children, in the companionship of Rudolf, to the
appointed escort of French soldiers who were to see them safely to _am
Sand_, and restore all the property that had been plundered.

"Sandwirth! I'll never forget you!--You'll soon be among us again!"
were the last words that burst from Rudolf, as he clasped his friend in
his arms, and then hurried away with tears streaming down his cheeks.

After the heart-breaking separation, one or two officers, with kindly
feelings, would have interrupted Hofer's solitude; but he mildly
requested to be left to himself. His guards said he prayed; whether he
wept, they did not say.

After a short interval of repose, he was sent, under a strong escort,
to Mantua, and confined in a prison near the Porta Molina, already
crowded by many Tyrolese.

He was speedily tried by a court-martial, which sat in the Palazzo
d'Arco. Its president was General Bisson, already embittered against
him and his cause by his own defeat. On comparing the votes, a great
difference of opinion was found as to the nature of his sentence. The
majority were for simple confinement: one or two had the courage to
vote for his complete acquittal; but a telegraph from Milan decided the
question by decreeing _death in twenty-four hours_,--thus putting the
mediation of Austria beyond his reach.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXI.

TYRANNY RAMPANT, GRACE TRIUMPHANT.


Hofer, though not expecting so sudden a doom, received the announcement
of it with fortitude. "Let me see a priest," said he.

Father Manifesti, a dignified and venerable old man, immediately came
to him, and remained with him to the hour of his death.

The greater part of the night was spent in devotional exercises; the
remainder in conversing on the war; in the course of which, Hofer
expressed his firm conviction that the Tyrol must and would eventually
revert to Austria. He also penned the following letter to an old friend
and neighbour in the Passeyrthal:--

  "MY VERY DEAR BROTHER,

 "It is the will of God, that here, at Mantua, I change a mortal for
 an eternal state. But, thanks be to God! this step appears as easy to
 me as if it were to conduct me elsewhere; and He will, doubtless,
 support me, and conduct me safely to the end, that my soul may join
 the company of the elect, in that place where it may be permitted to
 me to implore his mercy towards all those so dear to me here below;
 those, especially, whose kindnesses have reached me. You, yourself, my
 very dear friend, and your wife, are included among the latter; and
 my thanks are yours for the little book, and for many things else.
 Pray for me!--you and all the dear friends who yet live in the world I
 am leaving,--pray for me! that I may be delivered from the purgatory
 where I must otherwise, perhaps, suffer for my sins.

 "My very dear wife will take care that mass shall be said, and a
 requiem sung, in the Chapel of St. Martin, and that prayers shall be
 put up in the parish churches. The innkeeper will provide meat and
 soup, and half a pot of wine, for each of my friends and relatives.

 "My dear Puhler, go yourself to St. Martin, and tell all to the
 innkeeper: he will do what is necessary; but do not say a word to any
 other person of the affair.

 "May you, and all whom I leave behind me, be well and happy in this
 world, till we meet in a better, and praise God for ever. I beg all
 my friends, and the inhabitants of Passeyr, to remember me in their
 prayers. Let not my dear wife afflict herself too much on account of
 my death. I will pray for her, and for all, in the presence of God.

 "Farewell, fleeting world! death appears so sweet as to render life
 unworthy of a tear.

 "Written at five o'clock in the morning: and, at nine, I go to God,
 and the glorious company of the saints!

  "Thy beloved in this life,

                                            "ANDREW HOFER,

                                                  "Of Sand, in Passeyr.

  "Mantua, February 20, 1810.

 "In the name and by the help of the Lord I shall undertake this
 journey."

At the appointed hour, he was led from his prison cell to the bastion
near the Porta Ceresa. On his way thither, several Tyrolese threw
themselves, weeping, at his feet, and besought his blessing: others
pressed their anxious faces against their prison-bars, as though to
devour him with their eyes, weeping and praying for him aloud. Hofer
paused, and begged forgiveness of them all, if, haply, he had led them
astray; assuring them he felt confident they would yet be restored to
the protection of their loved emperor Franzel, for whom he gave a final
hurra.

He had already given into Father Manifesti's charge all that he
possessed, consisting of five hundred florins in Austrian bank-notes,
a silver snuff-box, and two rosaries, entreating him to convey them,
with his last words, to his family.

Arrived at the bastion, the commanding-officer ordered his men to halt.
The grenadiers formed a square, open in the rear; twelve men and a
corporal then stepped forward, while Hofer remained standing in the
centre.

The drummer then offered him a white handkerchief to bind over his
eyes, and desired him to kneel down; but, to the first, Hofer replied,
"I have been accustomed to look into the mouths of cannon;" and to the
second, "No! I am accustomed to stand in the presence of my Creator,
and in that posture will I deliver up my soul to Him." There was a
simple grandeur in his words and mien that unsteadied the hands of
his executioners. He gave a twenty-kreutzer piece to the corporal,
recommending him to do his duty well, and pronounced the word "Fire!"
in a firm voice. But they all fired ineffectually! A firmer hand, at
length, proved successful; and Hofer fell--fell, to rise to immortal
fame in this world, and eternal happiness in another! Among the
numerous crimes of Buonaparte, none stains him with a greater disgrace
than this.

Berthier, who was then at Vienna, excited general indignation by the
hypocrisy of his affected pity for him, which led him even to assert
that his death would give great pain to Napoleon, who would never have
permitted it, could he have helped it.

The spot on which he fell is still regarded as holy ground. His body,
instead of being left for some time, as is usual, at the place of
execution, was immediately borne by the grenadiers on a black bier
to St. Michael's church, where it lay in state, watched by a guard
of honour, that the people might see that the famous chieftain was
actually slain.

The funeral then took place with all the impressive solemnity of the
Roman Catholic ritual, as though, by the honour they paid his remains,
the French were anxious to compensate for the injuries they had done
him while living.

The voice of bitter weeping was heard from _am Sand_. The valleys of
the Tyrol were in sorrow. Troops of dejected or indignant peasants were
seen hurrying across the mountains, to attend the funeral services in
the parish churches of the Passeyrthal. The widow and orphans refused
to be comforted. A messenger from the Emperor Francis arrived at _am
Sand_, offering the family an asylum in Austria, with money enough to
settle themselves, and a pension of two thousand florins. But, no; Anna
Hofer could not bring herself to leave _am Sand_. She accepted the
pension, and the promise to provide for her son; but she herself would
never quit the old walls.

Speckbacher was not immediately aware of Hofer's fall. We left him
in his mountain fastnesses, dwelling among perpetual snows, and only
approaching the haunts of men when impelled by hunger. On one of these
occasions, he was cautiously approaching a group of people, consisting
of a man, woman, and some children, near the little village of
Volderberg, when it struck him that they appeared to be fugitives like
himself, and would probably prove unable to assist him in his need.

On approaching them, O joy! he beheld his Maria, with her children
and honest Zoppel. They had been driven from their home, and knew
not whither to turn, unless to some humble kinsfolk of Zoppel's.
Gratitude for their reunion made them, for a time, insensible to
their privations. Zoppel's good cousin made them welcome to some
out-buildings, where Zoppel supported them for some weeks by the
labour of his hands. Even in this poor refuge, they enjoyed sweet,
though sorrowful, communion: Maria had the children to occupy her, and
Speckbacher carved chamois-horns delicately, and made those exquisite
little bassi-relievi of birds, with feathers fastened on paper, for
which the Tyrolese are so famous.

At length his hiding-place was suspected; they withdrew to the ruin
of an old castle, perched on a dizzy peak. Here, too, his enemies
tracked him; so he was obliged to tear himself again from his beloved
family, and seek refuge in a cavern on the Gemshaken, one of the
most inaccessible heights of the Eisglet Scherr. Taking advantage
of a fearful snow-storm, which answered the purpose of effacing
his footsteps, he, aided by Zoppel, succeeded in conveying to this
dangerous place a stock of provisions, sufficient to last a temperate
mountaineer a fortnight or three weeks. When these were exhausted, he
could only depend on the wild animals he caught by stratagem, which he
was obliged to eat raw, as the smoke of a fire would have betrayed him
to his enemies. Endeavour to realize the terrible condition of this
man--his solitude, inaction, exposure to intense cold, miserable food,
and perpetual danger! And yet, though fallen on evil times, he seems to
have bated no jot of heart or hope; but, in the true spirit of a man
and a Christian, to have endured.

At the close of winter, when the snow began to melt, he had ventured
a few paces from his cavern, when an avalanche from the summit of the
Gemshaken suddenly descended with an awful noise, and swept him along
with it, down a descent of not less than half a league.

Though to escape with life was marvellous, he had not much reason to
exult in his good fortune, for he had dislocated his hip; and, finding
himself unable to return to his cavern, he painfully crawled towards
the little village of Volderberg, which had formerly given shelter to
him with his family. He did not reach the cottage of Zoppel's kinsman,
Hans, till after dark. Hans, hearing a slight sound outside, thought a
wolf was prowling round the cottage, and approached the door cautiously
with his rifle. On beholding a man crouching down, he at first took him
for a spy, and was half ready to give him the reception he had intended
for the wolf; but on hearing Speckbacher faintly say, "Hans, don't you
know me?" he became overwhelmed with joy and grief.

"O master! is it you?" cried he. "O master! master!"

"Draw me in, Hans,--draw me gently,--I have broken some bone, I think--"

"Alas! alas! and we knew not what had become of you--my dame and I. We
had given you over as lost. And to think of the poor Sandwirth being
shot!"--

"Hold!--"

Speckbacher began to cry like a child. His sobs grew deeper and deeper,
till they were terrible to hear. The awe-stricken peasants stood beside
him, pressing their hands hard together, without venturing to proffer a
word. "Tell me how it all was," said he, at length drying his eyes, and
then bursting out anew.

Hans told all he had heard; and Speckbacher continued to weep. At
length, the good woman of the cottage got him to bed, tended him
carefully, and gave him a warm drink in which she had infused a few
drops of the steinbock's blood, that rare and sovereign remedy for all
hurts in the mountains!

"This will throw you into a violent perspiration and put you soundly to
sleep," said she sapiently; "and after twenty-four hours in bed, you
will be quite well. The water in which I have bathed your wounds had
had the ball that shot the steinbock boiled in it, for that also is of
sovereign virtue in cases such as these."

Speckbacher did not lack faith; and, exhausted by sorrow, pain, and
fatigue, he soon justified his hostess's prediction by sleeping
profoundly, and for many hours. When he woke, it was with a heavy
heart. Hans had called in a village doctor to see to the dislocated
hip-joint; the case required inaction, but spies were abroad, and Hans
did not believe his safety from them could be reckoned on for a moment.
When night closed in, therefore, these two faithful men took the tall
Speckbacher in their arms, and carried him through by-paths to his own
cottage at Rinn, two good leagues off, where they deposited him in the
stable.

Zoppel, sleeping in the loft, drowsily called out--

"I say! who's there?" Then, peering down upon them, "Why, Hans! is it
you?"

"Hist!" says Hans. "We've brought home your master, and laid him on the
straw; and now we must be off, or day will break and we shall be seen,
which will spoil all."

"Oh, what joy!" murmurs Zoppel, somewhat incoherently, as he slips on
his clothes. He hastened down to Speckbacher, and they had a long talk
together, before they could well see one another's faces.

"But, master," says Zoppel, "I can't think how on earth we shall
manage, for Hans little guessed we have some Bavarian soldiers
quartered upon us, who are lounging in and out all day, expecting you
to be hanging about your home. But I know what I'll do! I'll dig a
trench for you underneath where the cattle stand, but beyond the reach
of their hoofs, and lay plenty of straw in it. Into this I will lift
you, and then cover you well up with straw, only leaving you just room
to breathe--"

"But, Zoppel, I should like to see my wife first--"

"No, no, master! no!--let her be, I advise ye. Women are soft-hearted,
and she would be distressed beyond measure to see you in such a
place, and would always be fidgeting about, wanting to make you more
comfortable, and the soldiers would naturally ask themselves, 'Why
does the woman go so often into the stable?' and so you would be found
out. No, no--leave her to me, master; I'll find the right time to tell
her you're safe and not far off; but if I told her _how_ near you were,
you wouldn't be safe long!"

All this while, Zoppel was digging the trench with might and main; and,
as soon as it was finished, he lifted his master into it, and covered
him well up: having previously given him a piece of bread and a good
draught of milk. It was well he had lost no time in these proceedings;
for scarcely had day dawned, when a couple of Bavarian soldiers lounged
into the stable to look after their horses, and began to talk to Zoppel
while he appeared to be busy cleaning some harness.

Speckbacher remained in this agreeable position seven weeks! _un vivo
sepolto_--unable to change his position, and only taking such food as
his servant could administer to him thus recumbent. But it was better
than the cavern of Gemshaken--here he had bread instead of raw meat,
and milk instead of snow-water: warmth instead of cold--society instead
of solitude--proximity to his family instead of being beyond all ken
of them--knowledge of the affairs of the world without, instead of
ignorance and anxiety.

He could hear the hens cluck and the geese cackle; could look into
the oxen's large, patient eyes, without fear of their betraying him;
could now and then hear Maria's voice, Anderl's laugh, and the baby's
cry. One day Anderl and his little sister had quite a long gossip just
outside the stable, within a yard of Speckbacher's ear. At other times,
he slily listened to the Bavarians; through whom, as they cleaned their
horses, he learned a good deal of news that was not intended for him:
among other things, that they were heartily sick of their present life.

His posture became almost intolerably irksome and painful; but it
effected one good thing; an entire cure of his dislocated joint; and,
when he found himself growing impatient, he thought of Him who was born
in a manger.

At length, just as he was beginning to feel he could bear it no longer,
the soldiers ran in, began saddling their horses, and, as he gathered
from them, were about to depart. In about an hour, Zoppel came in, full
of suppressed joy. After carefully securing the door, "I am now going
to dig you up," said he, "wash you, dress you, and trim your hair and
beard; for if your wife were to see you as you are, she would take you
for a wild beast."

Poor Speckbacher was quite a log in his hands; for long inaction had
deprived him of the use of his limbs; and it was not in less than two
or three days that he was able to quit the stable. Meanwhile, however,
Zoppel, having finished his task much to their mutual satisfaction,
sought Maria, and told her the wonderful secret. The joy of the
meeting, when she flew into the stable, need hardly be described.

It was felt, however, that the Tyrol could not shelter him; therefore,
as soon as he regained the use of his limbs, he reluctantly gave the
children his farewell embrace and blessing, and started at dusk towards
the Styrian Alps, accompanied the first league by his faithful wife.

Once across the Alps, he was no longer in danger; and, after a
fatiguing and painful journey, he reached Vienna, where he was joined a
few months afterwards by his Maria and the children. Here they remained
quietly, till the Tyrol reverted to Austria, when they returned to
spend the remainder of their days in their beloved country. Speckbacher
lived till 1820, when he died at the age of fifty-two, and was buried
with military honours. His brave son Anderl was recently, and may be
now, superintendent of the iron-works at Jenbach.

Father Joachim, after hiding in various quarters, and leading a life
of great peril for nearly a year, at length succeeded in crossing
the Bavarian Alps to the Lake of Constance. By way of St. Gall, he
reached the abbey of Einsiedeln, in Switzerland. From thence he passed
into the estates of Venice; and, by way of Friuli and Carinthia, he
at length reached Vienna, where he found Speckbacher. He received a
golden cross and a sum of money from the emperor, in acknowledgment
of his loyal service; and for some years afterwards, he officiated in
different cures in Lower Austria.

In 1848, the cry went through the Tyrol, "The Rothbart is up again!"
and eager volunteers flocked round the old man, who was once more, as
field-chaplain, on his way to the battle-field in Italy. Danger seemed
to threaten the empire from that quarter; and the Tyrolese, with their
old fidelity, were again ready to fight for Austria.

In 1856, the veteran had quarters assigned him in the imperial
summer-palace at Salzberg, with a pension of a thousand florins per
annum. There, on fine days, he might be seen, scarcely more than a year
ago, sitting under the majestic trees in tranquil meditation. His hair
was silver-grey; he was slightly lame, a little deaf, and very chary
of his speech: but, if spoken to of _the Year Nine_, his cheek would
kindle, his eye would light up, and the old man would speak of his
comrades and their stirring deeds as if they were but of yesterday. His
jubilee,--the fiftieth anniversary of his priesthood,--was held last
September. Soon afterwards, the venerable Capuchin was gathered to his
fathers.

In the autumn of 1810, a wedding-train might have been seen issuing
from the little church of St. Martin, and proceeding to _am Sand_.
It was not a gay, but a sympathetic festival, for many of Hofer's
companions in arms were there; and, though several spies mingled among
them, they were on their guard, and would not be tempted by them to
pledge the dangerous toast, "Freiheit Zur Tyrol!" But they drank health
and happiness to Rudolf and Theresa, and many an old allusion was
safely made, with a sigh, under the breath, and standing apart; and
they felt they all loved one another the dearer for having suffered
together in a generous though lost cause.

In 1824, a tardy act of justice was done by the Emperor of Austria.
The remains of Hofer were removed to Botzen; and thence, in solemn
procession, to Innsbruck, where they were interred in the imperial
church, on the day following the fourteenth anniversary of his
execution. The Tyrolese flocked to join the funeral in astonishing
multitudes. The governor of the Tyrol took part in it; the nobles and
dignitaries of the land swelled the train; long columns of imperial
troops slowly marched to the solemn strains of music that befit a
soldier's funeral. Then came the priests in their sacred vestments,
with crosier and crucifix borne aloft. On the coffin lay Hofer's
hat, sword, gold chain, and medal. Twelve of his brother innkeepers
bore the pall, and many of his companions in arms followed in the
procession. The Abbot of Wiltau pronounced the funeral benediction,--a
requiem was chanted; and then--they left his perishable remains with
all the honours that perishable men have to give.

A monument has since been erected over his tomb, which is not far from
that giant-guarded one of the Emperor Maximilian, and excites as much
interest, though of a different kind. His statue well represents him
in his accustomed peasant-garb, his face turned heavenward, one hand
grasping the national banner, the other holding the barrel of the rifle
slung from his shoulder. His sword-belt bears his initials, and the
date of the Year Nine. The whole embodies your conception of the man.

His name continues to be a dangerous spell. It is spoken under the
breath, if spoken at all. Gold cannot buy any memoir of his life
in the Tyrol. The German accounts of him are in the highest degree
depreciating. His poor relics in the Innsbruck Museum were at one time
deemed too exciting to be seen. But his spirit still lives among the
mountains: his name will never perish.

It was soon after the statue had been erected, that a couple of men
might have been seen attentively gazing upon it. The taller and elder
of the two leant strongly on the shoulder of the younger--the likeness
they bore one another bespoke them father and son.

Speckbacher gazed long and earnestly--then dashed away a tear. "'Tis
himself," murmured he, in a low, emphatic voice; "as like as stone can
be to flesh and blood. See, Anderl! how a plain, homely, upright man
may achieve fame! But yet this sinks into nothing, compared with his
heavenly reward."

THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

R. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAD STREET HILL.




                         RECENT PUBLICATIONS.

 THE LITTLE WORLD OF LONDON; or, Pictures in Little of London Life. By
 CHARLES MANBY SMITH. Author of "The Working Man's Way in the World,"
 &c. &c. Post 8vo., cloth, price 7s. 6d.

 JULIAN; or, The Close of an Era. By BUNGENER. 2 vols., price 4s.

 GEOLOGICAL FACTS; or, The Crust of the Earth, what it is, and what are
 its uses. By W. G. BARRETT. With wood cuts, fcap., cloth, 3s. 6d.

 THE HISTORY OF A MAN. Edited by GEORGE GILFILLAN. Price 7s. 6d., post
 8vo., cloth.

 HERTHA. By FREDRIKA BREMER. Post 8vo., cloth, price 7s. 6d.

 PILGRIMAGES TO ENGLISH SHRINES. By Mrs. S. C. HALL. With notes and
 illustrations by F. W. FAIRHOLT, F.S.A. Medium 8vo., handsomely bound
 and gilt, price £1 1s.

 THE USE OF SUNSHINE. A Christmas Narrative. By MENELLA BUTE SMEDLEY.
 Second edition, fcap., cloth, price 5s.

 ROSALIE. An authentic Narrative. Second edition, price 3s. 6d., neatly
 bound.

 THE OLD FOREST RANGER; or, Wild Sports of India. By MAJOR WALTER
 CAMPBELL, of Skipness. New edition, with illustrations on steel, post
 8vo., cloth, 8s.

 SOUTHERN AFRICA: A Geography and Natural History of the Country,
 Colonies, Inhabitants, &c. By the Rev. FRANCIS FLEMING, M.A.,
 F.R.G.S., Author of "Kaffraria." With Maps and Wood Cuts, price 10s.
 6d., post 8vo., cloth.

 NORTHERN AFRICA: EVENINGS IN MY TENT; or, Wanderings in the African
 Sahara. By the Rev. N. DAVIS, F.R.S.S.A. 2 vols., 8vo., with
 Illustrations, price 24s.

 INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL IN CENTRAL AMERICA, CHIAPAS, AND YUCATAN. By the
 Late JOHN L. STEPHENS. New edition, price 12s., 8vo., cloth, with
 Numerous Engravings.

 THE LOCALITIES OF ST. PAUL; or, The Life and Travels of the Apostle.
 Described from a Personal Visit by Rev. JOHN AITON, D.D. Post 8vo.,
 price 12s., with Illustrations.

 NINEVEH AND PERSEPOLIS: An Historical Sketch of Ancient Assyria and
 Persia, with an account of the recent researches in those Countries.
 By W. S. W. VAUX, M.A. Fourth edition, revised and enlarged. With
 numerous Illustrations. Post 8vo., cloth, price 8s.


By F. E. SMEDLEY, Esq.

 THE FORTUNES OF THE COLVILLE FAMILY. Cheap edition, 1s. 6d. boards,
 2s. 6d. cloth gilt.

 HARRY COVERDALE. 2s. 6d. boards, 3s. 6d. cl.

 LEWIS ARUNDEL. 3s. boards, 4s. cloth.

 FRANK FARLEIGH. 2s. 6d. boards, 3s. 6d. cloth.


By MARTIN F. TUPPER, Esq., D.C.L., F.R.S.

 BALLADS FOR THE TIMES, and other Poems. Third edition, with Vignette,
 foolscap, cloth, 7s. 6d.

 KING ALFRED'S POEMS. Foolscap, cloth, 3s.

 LYRICS. Second edition, foolscap, cloth, 3s. 6d.

 THE CROCK OF GOLD, AND OTHER TALES. With Illustrations by JOHN LEECH.
 Post 8vo., cloth, 5s.

 PROVERBIAL PHILOSOPHY. In French, portrait, foolscap, cloth, 3s. 6d.

ARTHUR HALL, VIRTUE, & CO., 25, PATERNOSTER ROW.




                                                       _January_, 1857.

                           GENERAL CATALOGUE
                         OF WORKS PUBLISHED BY
                       ARTHUR HALL, VIRTUE & CO.
                     25, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON.


 A BOY'S ADVENTURES IN THE WILDS OF AUSTRALIA. By WILLIAM HOWITT. Cuts
 by HARVEY. New and cheaper edition. Fcap. cloth, 4_s._

 ACKWORTH VOCABULARY, or English Spelling Book; with the Meaning
 attached to each Word. Compiled for the use of Ackworth School. New
 Edition. 18mo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 AITON (REV. DR.),--THE LOCALITIES OF ST. PAUL; or, The Life and
 Travels of the Apostle. Described from a Personal Visit by REV. JOHN
 AITON, D.D. With Illustrations. Post 8vo. cloth, 12_s._

 AKERMAN (J. Y.),--LEGENDS OF OLD LONDON. Post 8vo. cloth, gilt, 3_s._
 6_d._; plain, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ANALYSIS AND SUMMARY OF OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY AND THE LAWS OF MOSES,
 with a connexion between the Old and New Testaments, an Introductory
 Outline of the Geography, Political History, &c. By J. T. WHEELER,
 F.R.G.S. Fifth Edition, post 8vo. cloth, 5_s._ 6_d._

 ---- NEW TESTAMENT HISTORY; including, 1. The Four Gospels harmonized
 into one continuous Narrative. 2. The Acts of the Apostles, and
 continuous History of St. Paul. 3. An Analysis of the Epistles and
 Book of Revelation. 4. An Introductory Outline of the Geography,
 Critical History, Authenticity, Credibility, and Inspiration of
 the New Testament. The whole Illustrated by copious Historical,
 Geographical, and Antiquarian Notes, Chronological Tables, &c. Third
 Edition, revised. Post 8vo. cloth, 5_s._ 6_d._

 ---- A POPULAR ABRIDGMENT OF OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT HISTORY, for
 Schools, Families, and General Reading. Explained by Historical and
 Geographical Illustrations, and numerous Map Diagrams. Two Vols. 18mo.
 cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ each.

 ---- THE HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS.
 Illustrated with Five coloured Maps, and large View of Jerusalem, with
 a Plan of the Ancient City. Folio, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE HUMAN MIND, (MANUAL OF THE.) By Rev. J.
 CARLILE, D.D. Fcap. cloth, 5S.

 ANDERSON,--THE PLEASURES OF HOME; a Poem, in Two Parts. By the Rev.
 JOHN ANDERSON, Minister of Kinnoull. Post 8vo. cloth, 4_s._

 APOCALYPTIC SKETCHES; or, LECTURES on the BOOK of REVELATION.
 Delivered in Exeter Hall, and at Crown Court Church. By the Rev. JOHN
 CUMMING, D.D. NEW EDITIONS, revised and corrected, with INDICES.
 Sixteenth Thousand. Three Vols. Fcap. cloth, gilt, 9_s._ each; morocco
 extra, 39_s._


 ART-JOURNAL (THE), an Illustrated Journal of the Fine Arts, the Arts
 of Design, Manufacture, &c. &c. Published Monthly, with Two Engravings
 from the Royal Gallery, and between Forty and Fifty fine Engravings on
 Wood. 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- New Series, Vols. I. and II., 1855 and 1856. Containing Line
 Engravings of the Royal Gallery, &c. 4to cloth, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._
 each.

 ---- 1849-54. Containing the "VERNON GALLERY," complete. Six Vols.
 super-royal 4to. cloth, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._ each.

 ---- ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE of the Great Industrial Exhibition of 1851.
 Imperial 4to. cloth, gilt edges, 21_s._

 ---- of the Great Exhibition in Dublin. Cloth, gilt edges, 10_s._

 ---- of the Exhibition of Art Industry in Paris. Cloth, 10_s._

 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF WILLIAM JERDAN; With his Literary, Political, and
 Social Reminiscences and Correspondence, during the last Forty Years,
 as Editor of the "Sun" Newspaper, 1812-17, and of the "Literary
 Gazette," 1817-50, in connexion with most of the Eminent Persons
 who have been distinguished in the past half-century as Statesmen,
 Poets, Authors, Men of Science, Artists, &c; with Portraits, &c. Now
 complete. In 4 Vols. post 8vo. cloth, 21_s._

 BAKEWELL'S (FREDERICK C.) PHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATIONS, in which are
 familiarly explained the causes of many daily occurring Natural
 Phenomena. Third Edition, with Cuts. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 BALLADS FOR THE TIMES, now first collected. American Lyrics,
 Geraldine. Modern Pyramid, Hactenus, A Thousand Lines, and Other
 Poems, by MARTIN F. TUPPER, D.C.L. F.R.S. Third Edition, with Vignette
 and Frontispiece, uniform with "Proverbial Philosophy," fcap. cloth,
 7_s._ 6_d._

 "With smoothness of measure, Mr. Tupper's design is always
 excellent, and his versification is brought to bear upon things of
 no transient interest. It is one of the best characteristics of his
 labours, that he does not write for praise, but for the benefit of
 his fellow-men--not merely for time, but for eternity."--_Bell's
 Messenger._

 BAPTISMAL FONT (THE), an Exposition of the NATURE AND OBLIGATIONS OF
 CHRISTIAN BAPTISM. With an APPENDIX. By the Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D.
 Fourth Edition, fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._

 BARBAULD'S (MRS.), LEÇONS POUR DES ENFANTS, depuis l'âge de Deux Ans
 jusqu'à Cinq. Avec une Interprétation Anglais. New Edition. 18mo.
 cloth, 2_s._

 BARRETT (W. G.),--GEOLOGICAL FACTS; or, The Crust of the Earth, what it
 is, and what are its uses. With Woodcuts, fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 BARTLETT (W. H.),--FOOTSTEPS OF OUR LORD AND HIS APOSTLES, in Syria,
 Greece, and Italy. A succession of Visits to the Scenes of New
 Testament Narrative. With Twenty-three Steel Engravings, and several
 Woodcuts. Third Edition, super-royal 8vo. cloth, gilt edges, 12_s._;
 morocco elegant, 21_s._

 ---- FORTY DAYS IN THE DESERT, on the Track of the Israelites; or,
 a Journey from Cairo by WADY FEIRAS to Mount Sinai and Petra, with
 Twenty-seven Engravings on Steel, a Map, and numerous Woodcuts. Fifth
 Edition, super-royal 8vo, cloth full gilt. 12_s._; morocco elegant,
 21_s._

 ---- GLEANINGS, ANTIQUARIAN AND PICTORIAL, ON THE OVERLAND ROUTE, with
 Twenty-eight Plates or Maps, and Several Woodcuts. Second Edition,
 super-royal 8vo. cloth, 16_s._; morocco elegant, 28_s._

 ---- HISTORIC SCENES IN AMERICA. With Illustrations.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 ---- JERUSALEM REVISITED. With numerous Illustrations engraved on
 Steel, and Woodcuts. Super-royal 8vo. cloth, 12_s._; morocco, 21_s._

 ---- THE NILE BOAT; or, Glimpses of the Land of Egypt. With
 Thirty-five Steel Engravings and Maps, and numerous Woodcuts. Third
 Edition, in super-royal 8vo. cloth full gilt, 16_s._; morocco elegant,
 28_s._

 ---- PICTURES FROM SICILY. With Thirty-three Steel Engravings, and
 numerous Woodcuts. Super-royal 8vo. cloth, full gilt, 16_s._; morocco
 elegant, 28_s._

 ---- THE PILGRIM FATHERS; or, the Founders of New England in the reign
 of James I. With 28 Plates, &c. Second Edition, super-royal 8vo.
 cloth, 12_s._; morocco elegant, 21_s._

 ---- SCRIPTURE SITES AND SCENES, from actual Survey, in Egypt, Arabia,
 and Palestine. Illustrated by Seventeen Steel Engravings, Three Maps,
 and Thirty-seven Woodcuts. Post 8vo. cloth, gilt edges, 4_s._

 ---- WALKS ABOUT JERUSALEM AND ITS ENVIRONS. With Twenty-four
 Engravings on Steel, and Maps, and many Woodcuts. New Edition,
 super-royal 8vo. cloth, full gilt, 12_s._; morocco elegant, 21_s._

 BARTON (BERNARD),--LETTERS AND POEMS. With MEMOIR, Edited by his
 DAUGHTER. New Edition, with Portrait, fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._ large
 paper, 10_s._

 BASES OF BELIEF, an Examination of Christianity as a Divine Revelation
 by the Light of Recognised Facts and Principles, in Four Parts. By
 EDWARD MIALL, M.P. Second Edition, 8vo. cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

 BASKET OF FLOWERS; or, Piety and Truth Triumphant. A Tale for the
 Young. 32mo. cloth, gilt edges, 1_s._

 BELLENGER'S ONE HUNDRED CHOICE FABLES, imitated from LA FONTAINE. For
 the use of Children, and all Persons beginning to learn the French
 language; with a DICTIONARY of the Words and Idiomatic Phrases,
 Grammatically Explained. New Edition, revised and corrected by C. J.
 DELILLE, Professor at Christ's Hospital. 12mo. cloth, 2_s._

 BIBLE REVISION. By the Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. F.R.S.E. 8vo. 1_s._
 6_d._

 BINGLEY'S USEFUL KNOWLEDGE. Enlarged by COOPER. Seventh Edition. Two
 Vols. 12mo. cloth, 12_s._

 BONAVENTURE (ST.),--THE PSALTER OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. Translated
 from the last French Edition of 1852, and carefully compared with the
 Latin. By the Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. 12mo. cloth, 2_s._

 BOY AND THE BIRDS (THE). By EMILY TAYLOR. With Sixteen fine Woodcuts,
 from LANDSEER'S Designs. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 BREMER.--HOMES OF THE NEW WORLD. Impressions of America. By FREDERIKA
 BREMER. With Illustrations. Three Vols. 8vo. New Edition.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 ---- HERTHA. Translated by MARY HOWITT. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, with Woodcuts, and Memoir by J. A. ST.
 JOHN. Fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 3_s._ 6_d._

 BUTLER'S ANALOGY OF RELIGION; with Introduction by DR. CROLY.
 Portrait. New Edition. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 CAMPBELL (MAJOR WALTER),--THE OLD FOREST RANGER; or, Wild Sports of
 India on the Neilgherry Hills, in the Jungles, and on the Plains. New
 Edition. With Illustrations on Steel. Post 8vo. cloth, 8_s._

 CAMPBELL,--PEACE IN BELIEVING, a Memoir of Isabella Campbell. New
 Edition. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 CANADIAN CRUSOES; a Tale of the Rice Lake Plains. By Mrs. TRAILL,
 (late Catharine Parr Strickland,) Authoress of "The Backwoods of
 Canada," &c. Edited by AGNES STRICKLAND. With numerous Illustrations
 by HARVEY. Fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 6_s._

 CARLILE (REV. J., D.D.),--MANUAL OF THE ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE
 HUMAN MIND. Fcap. cloth, 5_s._

 CASTLES AND ABBEYS OF ENGLAND (THE). By W. BEATTIE, M.D. With numerous
 Illustrations. Two Vols. imperial 8vo. cloth, 2_l._ 10_s._

 CELT, ROMAN, AND SAXON (THE); a History of the Early Inhabitants of
 Britain, down to the Conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity.
 Illustrated by the Ancient Remains brought to light by recent
 research. By THOMAS WRIGHT, ESQ. M.A. F.S.A. With numerous Engravings.
 Post 8vo. cloth, 8_s._

 CHANT BOOK, Portions of Psalms, &c. By W. SHELMERDINE. Fcap. cloth,
 1_s._

 CHARLIE'S DISCOVERIES; or, a Good use for Eyes and Ears. With Cuts by
 WILLIAMS. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 CHEMISTRY NO MYSTERY; being the Subject Matter of a Course of Lectures
 by Dr. Scoffern. Illustrated with Diagrams and Woodcuts. Second
 Edition, revised and corrected, with Index. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 CHERRY AND VIOLET: a Tale of the Great Plague. By the Author of "Mary
 Powell." Second Edition, with Frontispiece, price 7_s._ 6_d._ cloth,
 antique.

 CHRISTIAN IN PALESTINE; or, Scenes of Sacred History. By HENRY
 STEBBING, D.D., Illustrated with Eighty Engravings on Steel from
 designs by W. H. BARTLETT. 4to. cloth, gilt edges, 2_l._

 CHRISTIE'S CONSTRUCTIVE ETYMOLOGICAL SPELLING-BOOK. New Edition, 12mo.
 cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 CHRONICLES OF MERRY ENGLAND, related to her People. By the Author of
 "Mary Powell." Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 CHURCH BEFORE THE FLOOD (THE). By the REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Third
 Thousand, fcap. cloth, full gilt, 9_s._

 CITY SCENES; or, a Peep into London. With many Plates. 16mo. cloth,
 2_s._ 6_d._

 CLARINDA SINGLEHART (Some Account of). By the Author of "Mary Powell."
 Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 CLAUDE THE COLPORTEUR. By the Author of "Mary Powell." With Coloured
 Frontispiece after WARREN. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 COBBIN (REV. INGRAM, M.A.),--DR. WATTS'S DIVINE AND MORAL SONGS FOR
 CHILDREN. With Anecdotes and Reflections. With Frontispiece and
 Fifty-seven Woodcuts. New Edition. 18mo. cloth, 1_s._; with gilt
 edges, 1_s._ 6_d._

 COLA MONTI; or, the Story of a Genius. A Tale for Boys. By the Author
 of "How to win Love." With Four Illustrations by FRANKLIN. Fcap.
 cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 COLLETTE'S (J. H.) ROMANISM IN ENGLAND EXPOSED. Second Edition,
 enlarged and improved, fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- POPISH INFALLIBILITY. Sewed, 1_s._

 COLLOQUIES OF EDWARD OSBORNE (THE), Citizen and Cloth-Worker of
 London, as reported by the Author of "Mary Powell." Second Edition,
 post 8vo. cloth, gilt edges, 7_s._ 6_d._; morocco antique, 14_s._

 COMMUNION TABLE (THE); or, Communicant's Manual. A plain and Practical
 Exposition of the Lord's Supper, by REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Third
 Edition, enlarged. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._

 CONSOLATIONS; or, Leaves from the Tree of Life. By the Rev. JOHN
 CUMMING, D.D. F.R.S.E. Fcap. cloth, 7_s._

 COTTAGE IN THE CHALK-PIT. By C. A. MANT. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 CROCK OF GOLD (THE). A Tale of Covetousness. By MARTIN F. TUPPER,
 D.C.L. F.R.S. With Frontispiece by JOHN LEECH. Post 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

 CROSLAND'S (MRS. NEWTON) STRATAGEMS. With Cuts. 16mo. Cloth, gilt
 edges, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- TOIL AND TRIAL, a Story of London Life. With Frontispiece by JOHN
 LEECH. Post 8vo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 CROWE'S (CATHARINE) PIPPIE'S WARNING; or, the Adventures of a Dancing
 Dog. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._ 6_d._

 CUMMING (REV. JOHN, D.D.),--APOCALYPTIC SKETCHES; or, LECTURES on the
 BOOK OF REVELATION, delivered in Exeter Hall, and Crown Court Church.
 New Editions, revised and corrected by the Author, with Index, &c.
 Sixteenth Thousand. Three Vols. cloth, full gilt, 9_s._ each.

 ---- THE BAPTISMAL FONT; an Exposition of the Nature and Obligations
 of Christian Baptism. With an Appendix. Fourth Edition, fcap. cloth,
 gilt edges, 2_s._

 ---- BIBLE REVISION AND TRANSLATION; an Argument for holding fast what
 we have. Demy 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._ sewed.

 ---- CHRIST OUR PASSOVER; or, Thoughts on the Atonement. Second
 Edition. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- THE CHURCH BEFORE THE FLOOD. Third Thousand. Fcap. cloth, full
 gilt, 9_s._

 ---- THE COMFORTER; or, Thoughts on the Holy Spirit. Fcap. cloth,
 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- THE COMMUNION TABLE; or, COMMUNICANT'S MANUAL: a plain and
 practical EXPOSITION of the LORD'S SUPPER. Third Edition, enlarged.
 Fcap. cloth, 3_s._

 ---- CONSOLATIONS; or, Leaves from the Tree of Life. Fcap. cloth, 7_s._

 ---- DAILY FAMILY DEVOTION; or, GUIDE to FAMILY WORSHIP. 4to. cloth,
 21_s._; or with Plates, 25_s._

 ---- THE DAILY LIFE; or, Precepts and Prescriptions for Christian
 Living. Third and Cheaper Edition. Fcap. cloth, 5_s._

 ---- THE FINGER OF GOD. Fourth Edition. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- FORESHADOWS; or, LECTURES on our LORD'S MIRACLES and PARABLES,
 as Earnests of the Age to come. Fifth Thousand. Two Volumes uniformly
 printed. With Designs by FRANKLIN. Cloth, full gilt, 9_s._ each.

 ---- HAMMERSMITH PROTESTANT DISCUSSION, between the REV. JOHN CUMMING,
 D.D. and DANIEL FRENCH, ESQ., Barrister-at-Law. Cheap Edition. Tenth
 Thousand, post 8vo. cloth, 6_s._

 ---- INFANT SALVATION; or, ALL SAVED WHO DIE IN INFANCY. Specially
 addressed to Mothers mourning the Loss of Infants and Children. Fifth
 Edition. Fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._

 ---- IS CHRISTIANITY FROM GOD? A Manual of Christian Evidences for
 Scripture Readers, Sunday School Teachers, City Missionaries, and
 Young Persons. Tenth Edition. Fcap. 3_s._ cloth.

 ---- JOSEPH THE LAST OF THE PATRIARCHS. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6_s._

 ---- LECTURES AT EXETER HALL; or, A Challenge to Cardinal Wiseman.
 Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- LECTURES ON THE SEVEN CHURCHES OF ASIA MINOR. [Apocalyptic
 Sketches. Third Series.] Illustrated by Wood Engravings representing
 the present state of the Apostolic Churches. Eleventh Thousand. Fcap.
 cloth, full gilt, 9_s._

 ---- LECTURES FOR THE TIMES; or, Illustrations and Refutations of the
 Errors of Romanism and Tractarianism. New and Cheaper Edition, fcap.
 cloth, 5_s._

 ---- LECTURES TO YOUNG MEN. A Collected edition, with Additions.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 ---- A MESSAGE FROM GOD; or, THOUGHTS ON RELIGION for THINKING MEN.
 Fifth Edition, fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._

 ---- OUR FATHER; A MANUAL OF FAMILY PRAYERS for General and Special
 Occasions, with Short Prayers for Spare Minutes, and Passages for
 Reflection. Sixth Edition. Fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 3_s._

 ---- OCCASIONAL DISCOURSES. New Edition. Two Vols. fcap. cloth, 8_s._

 ---- PROPHETIC STUDIES; or, LECTURES on the BOOK OF DANIEL. Ninth
 Thousand. Fcap. cloth, full gilt, 9_s._

 ---- PULPIT PSALMODY. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._; roan, 5_s._; morocco,
 6_s._ 6_d._

 ---- PSALTER OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. Written by ST. BONAVENTURE.
 Translated from the last French Edition of 1852, and carefully
 compared with the Latin. 12mo. cloth, 2_s._

 ---- SABBATH EVENING READINGS ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. The Four Gospels
 complete, fcap. cloth, 20_s._

 _The separate Volumes are_--

  ST. MATTHEW. 5_s._
  ST. JOHN. 6_s._
  ST. MARK. 3_s._
  THE ACTS. 7_s._
  ST. LUKE. 6_s._
  THE ROMANS. 4_s._ 6_d._
  THE CORINTHIANS, publishing in Numbers.

 ---- REVELATION. 2d Edition. Fcap. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 ---- SALVATION. A Sermon preached before the Queen. Twentieth
 Thousand. Sewed, 6_d._

 ---- SIGNS OF THE TIMES. Complete Edition. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 ---- TENT AND THE ALTAR; or. Sketches from Patriarchal Life. New
 Edition. Fcap. cloth, full gilt, 9_s._

 ---- THE WAR AND ITS ISSUES. New Edition, enlarged. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._
 6_d._

 ---- WELLINGTON. A LECTURE. New and Enlarged Edition, with Valuable
 Additions. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 DARTON (MARGARET E.),--THE EARTH AND ITS INHABITANTS. With
 Frontispiece. Second Edition, crown 8vo. cloth, 5_s._

 DECOY (THE); or, an Agreeable Method of Teaching Children the
 elementary Parts of English Grammar. Sewed, 1_s._

 DE LA VOYE'S (MARIN) NEW CRITICAL FRENCH PRONOUNCING VOCABULARY, with
 Exercises on Reading, and Critical Rules for French Pronunciation.
 12mo. bound, 2_s._

 DESLYON'S FRENCH DIALOGUES, Practical and Familiar, constructed so as
 to enable all Persons at once to practise Conversing in the French
 Language; with FAMILIAR LETTERS in FRENCH and ENGLISH, adapted to the
 capacities of Youth. New Edition, 12mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- FRENCH TUTOR; or, Practical Exposition of the best French
 Grammarians, with familiar Exercises and Questions on every Rule, to
 serve for Examination and Repetition. Third Edition, 12mo. cloth, 4_s._

 DIALOGUES BETWEEN A POPISH PRIEST AND AN ENGLISH PROTESTANT, wherein
 the Principal Points and Arguments of both Religions are truly
 Proposed, and fully Examined. By MATTHEW POOLE. New Edition, with the
 References revised and corrected. By the REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. 18mo.
 cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 DOCTOR'S LITTLE DAUGHTER (THE). The Story of a Child's Life amidst the
 Woods and Hills. By ELIZA METEYARD, with numerous Illustrations by
 HARVEY. Fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 7_s._ 6_d._

 DOCTOR OLIVER'S MAID. A Tale of English Life. Republished from
 Sharpe's London Magazine. By SILVERPEN.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 DOUBLE CLAIM (THE), a Tale of Real Life. By MRS. T. K. HERVEY. With
 Frontispiece by WEIR. Post 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

 EARTH AND ITS INHABITANTS (THE). By MARGARET E. DARTON. Second
 Edition, with Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5_s._

 EDDY'S (DANIEL C.) HEROINES OF THE MISSIONARY ENTERPRISE; or, Sketches
 of Prominent Female Missionaries. With Preface by the Rev. JOHN
 CUMMING, D.D. Third Edition. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 EMILIE, THE PEACE-MAKER. By MRS. GELDART. Frontispiece, fcap. cloth,
 2_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges, 3_s._

 ENGLISH STORIES OF THE OLDEN TIME. By MARIA HACK. A New Edition. With
 Vignettes by HARVEY.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 EUPHONIA: Portions of Holy Scripture marked for Chanting, with Forty
 Chants arranged for the Voice and Organ, or Pianoforte. Third Edition,
 post 8vo. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._

 Ditto. 18mo. cloth, 1_s._

 Ditto. Ditto, sewed, 6_d._

 EVENINGS AT HOME; or, the Juvenile Budget opened. By Dr. AIKEN and
 Mrs. BARBAULD. Sixteenth Edition, revised and newly arranged by ARTHUR
 AIKEN, Esq. and MISS AIKEN. With Engravings by HARVEY. Fcap. cloth,
 3_s._ 6_d._

 EVENINGS IN MY TENT; or, Wanderings in the African Sahara. By Rev. N.
 DAVIS, F.R.S. S.A. With Illustrations, Two Vols. post 8vo. cloth,
 24_s._

 EXETER HALL LECTURES. By DR. CUMMING and REV. R. J. MCGHEE. Fcap.
 cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 EXPOSITORY READINGS ON THE BOOK OF REVELATION, forming a short and
 continuous Commentary on the Apocalypse. By REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D.
 Second Edition. Fcap. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 FAIRHOLT'S DICTIONARY OF TERMS USED IN THE FINE ARTS, &c. Post 8vo.
 cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

 FARR'S (EDWARD) MANUAL OF GEOGRAPHY, Physical and Political. For the
 use of Schools and Families, with Questions for Examination. With
 Illustrations. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._

 FELTON'S (J.) IMPROVED METHOD OF PERFORMING COMMERCIAL CALCULATIONS;
 representing the Science of Arithmetic in a New Light. A Book of
 General Utility. Containing, among other matter, a full Illustration of
 the Theory of Proportion and the German Chain Rule. 12mo. cloth, 2_s._

 ---- THE TEACHER'S MANUAL OF MENTAL ARITHMETIC; displaying a Simple
 Method of successfully Communicating Instruction in that most useful
 Science. Together with a KEY TO THE CALCULATIONS. 12mo. cloth, 2_s._

 FIELDING (HENRY), THE LIFE OF. By F. LAWRENCE. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._
 6_d._

 FIRESIDE STORIES; or, Recollections of my Schoolfellows. Third
 Edition, with Thirteen Illustrations. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 FLETCHER (REV. ALEXANDER, D.D.),--A GUIDE TO FAMILY DEVOTION,
 containing 730 Hymns, Prayers, and Passages of Scripture, with
 appropriate reflections. The whole arranged to form a Complete and
 Distinct Family Service for every Morning and Evening in the Year,
 with Illustrations. New Edition, revised, royal 4to. cloth, gilt
 edges, 28_s._

 ---- ASSEMBLY'S CATECHISM. Divided into Fifty-two Lessons. Sewed, 8_d._

 FOOTSTEPS OF OUR LORD AND HIS APOSTLES, IN SYRIA, GREECE, AND ITALY. A
 succession of Visits to the Scenes of New Testament Narrative. By W.
 H. BARTLETT. With Twenty-three Steel Engravings, and several Woodcuts.
 Third Edition, super-royal 8vo. cloth, gilt edges, 12_s._; morocco
 elegant, 21_s._

 FORESHADOWS; or, LECTURES on our LORD'S MIRACLES and PARABLES,
 as Earnests of the Age to come. By Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Fifth
 Thousand. With Designs by FRANKLIN. Two Vols. Fcap. cloth, full gilt,
 9_s._ each.

 FORTY DAYS IN THE DESERT, ON THE TRACK OF THE ISRAELITES; or, a
 Journey from Cairo by Wady Feiran to Mount Sinai and Petra. By W. H.
 BARTLETT. Illustrated with Twenty-seven Engravings on Steel, a Map,
 and numerous Woodcuts. Fifth Edition, super-royal 8vo. cloth, full
 gilt, 12_s._; morocco elegant, 21_s._

 FRANK FAIRLEGH; or, Scenes from the Life of a Private Pupil. By F. E.
 SMEDLEY, ESQ. Cheap Edition, boards, 2_s._ 6_d._; cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._;
 or with Thirty Illustrations, by GEORGE CRUIKSHANK. 8vo. cloth, 16_s._

 GELDART'S (MRS. THOMAS) LOVE, A REALITY, NOT ROMANCE. With cuts by
 GILBERT. Fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 3_s._ 6_d._

 ---- ELDER BROTHERS. 16mo. cloth, 9_d._

 ---- EMILIE, THE PEACE-MAKER. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges,
 3_s._

 ---- MAY DUNDAS. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges, 3_s._

 ---- NURSERY GUIDE. 18mo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 ---- STORIES OF SCOTLAND. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges, 3_s._

 ---- THOUGHTS OF HOME. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- TRUTH IS EVERYTHING. 2d Edit. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._; gilt
 edges, 3_s._

 GEMS OF EUROPEAN ART. The best Pictures of the best Schools,
 containing Ninety highly-finished Engravings. Edited by S. C. HALL,
 ESQ. F.S.A. Two Vols. folio cloth, gilt edges, 5_l._

 GEOLOGICAL FACTS; or, The Crust of the Earth, what it is, and what are
 its uses. By the Rev. W. G. BARRETT. With Woodcuts, Fcap. cloth, 3_s._
 6_d._

 GIBBON'S DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Illustrated edition,
 with Memoir of the Author, and additional Notes, principally referring
 to Christianity. From the French of M. GUIZOT. Two Vols. super-royal
 8vo. cloth gilt, 1_l._ 16_s._

 GILES'S (JAS.) ENGLISH PARSING LESSONS. Seventeenth Edition. 12mo.
 cloth, 2_s._

 GILFILLAN (GEORGE),--THE HISTORY OF A MAN. Edited by the Rev. G.
 GILFILLAN. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 ---- THE MARTYRS, HEROES, AND BARDS OF THE SCOTTISH COVENANT. Fcap.
 cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 GLEANINGS, ANTIQUARIAN AND PICTORIAL, ON THE OVERLAND ROUTE. By W. H.
 BARTLETT. With Twenty-eight Plates and Maps, and numerous Woodcuts.
 Second Edition, super-royal 8vo. cloth gilt, 16_s._; morocco elegant,
 28_s._

 GODWIN (REV. B., D.D.),--THE PHILOSOPHY OF ATHEISM EXAMINED, AND
 COMPARED WITH CHRISTIANITY. A Course of Popular Lectures, delivered
 at Bradford, Yorkshire, in January and February, 1853. Third Edition.
 Fcap. cloth, 3_s._

 GOOD OLD TIMES (THE); a Tale of Auvergne. By the Author of "Mary
 Powell." Frontispiece. Second Edition. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 GRIEVE (JOHN),--THE FARMER'S ASSISTANT, AND AGRICULTURIST'S CALENDAR.
 New and Enlarged Edition. Fcap. cloth, 4_s._

 HACK'S (MARIA) ENGLISH STORIES OF THE OLDEN TIME. Vignettes by HARVEY.
 New Edition. Two Vols.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 ---- GRECIAN STORIES. With Illustrations. New Edition.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 ---- HARRY BEAUFOY; or, the Pupil of Nature. New Edition, with Cuts by
 LANDSEER. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 ---- STORIES OF ANIMALS. Adapted for Children from Three to Ten Years
 of Age. With Illustrations. Two Vols. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ each.

 ---- WINTER EVENINGS; or, Tales of Travellers. New Edition.
 Illustrations by GILBERT. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 HAIGH'S (J., A.M.) LATIN POCKET DICTIONARY; designed for the Junior
 Forms in Schools. New Edition, 18mo. bound, 2_s._ 6_d._

 HALL (MRS. S. C.),--PILGRIMAGES TO ENGLISH SHRINES. With Notes and
 Illustrations by F. W. FAIRHOLT, F.S.A. New Edition. In One Vol. 8vo.
 cloth, gilt edges, 21_s._; morocco, 28_s._

 ---- (MR. AND MRS. S. C.) IRELAND, ITS SCENERY AND CHARACTER. New
 Edition, with numerous Engravings on Steel, Maps, and Five Hundred
 Woodcuts. Three Vols. royal 8vo. cloth, 3_l._ 3_s._

 ---- HANDBOOKS FOR IRELAND, with numerous Illustrations.

  No. 1.--DUBLIN AND WICKLOW.
  No. 2.--THE SOUTH AND KILLARNEY.
  No. 3.--NORTH AND THE GIANT'S CAUSEWAY.
  No. 4.--THE WEST AND CONNEMARA.

 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ each.

 ---- (MR. AND MRS. S. C.) A WEEK AT KILLARNEY, being a Guide to
 Tourists to the Lakes of Killarney. Illustrated by Twenty Engravings
 on Steel, and One Hundred and Ten Woodcuts. New Edition, 4to. cloth,
 8_s._

 HAMMERSMITH PROTESTANT DISCUSSION (THE), between DR. CUMMING and MR.
 FRENCH. Cheap Edition, Tenth Thousand, crown 8vo. cloth, 6_s._

 HAPPY TRANSFORMATION; or, the History of a London Apprentice. With
 Preface, by Rev. J. A. JAMES. 18mo. cloth, 1_s._

 HARRY COVERDALE'S COURTSHIP, AND WHAT CAME OF IT. By FRANK E. SMEDLEY
 (FRANK FAIRLEGH). With Illustrations by HABLOT K. BROWNE. 8vo. cloth,
 16_s._

 HEART; a Tale of False-witness. By MARTIN F. TUPPER, D.C.L. With
 Frontispiece by LEECH. Post 8vo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 HENDRY'S HISTORY OF GREECE. In Easy Lessons. Adapted to Children of
 from Six to Ten Years of Age. With Illustrations. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 ---- HISTORY OF ROME. In Easy Lessons. Adapted for Children of from
 Six to Ten Years of Age. With Illustrations. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 HEROINES OF THE MISSIONARY ENTERPRISE; or, Sketches of Prominent
 Female Missionaries. By DANIEL C. EDDY. With Preface by the Rev. JOHN
 CUMMING, D.D. Second Edition, fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._ 6_d._

 HERTHA. By MISS FREDRIKA BREMER. Translated by MARY HOWITT. Post 8vo.
 cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 HERVEY (MRS. T. K.),--THE DOUBLE CLAIM, a Tale of Real Life. With
 Frontispiece by WEIR. Post 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

 HILL'S (S. S.) TRAVELS ON THE SHORES OF THE BALTIC. Post 8vo. cloth,
 8_s._ 6_d._

 HILL SIDE (THE); or, Illustrations of the Simple Terms used in Logic.
 By the Author of "Mary Powell." Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 HISTORIC SCENES IN AMERICA. By W. H. BARTLETT. With Illustrations.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 HISTORY OF A MAN (THE). Edited by GEORGE GILFILLAN. Post 8vo. cloth,
 7_s._ 6_d._

 HOFLAND LIBRARY; for the Instruction and Amusement of Youth.
 Illustrated with Plates, and handsomely bound in embossed Scarlet
 Cloth, with Gilt Edges, &c.

 FIRST CLASS, in 12mo.--_Price 2s. 6d._

 1. MEMOIR of the LIFE and LITERARY REMAINS of MRS. HOFLAND.

 By T. RAMSAY, Esq. With Portrait.

   2. ALFRED CAMPBELL.
   3. DECISION; a Tale.
   4. ENERGY.
   5. FORTITUDE.
   6. HUMILITY.
   7. INTEGRITY.
   8. MODERATION.
   9. PATIENCE.
  10. REFLECTION.
  11. SELF-DENIAL.
  12. YOUNG CADET.
  13. YOUNG PILGRIM.

HOFLAND LIBRARY:--

SECOND CLASS, in 18mo.--_Price 1s. 6d._

   1. ADELAIDE.
   2. AFFECTIONATE BROTHERS.
   3. ALICIA AND HER AUNT.
   4. BARBADOS GIRL.
   5. BLIND FARMER AND HIS CHILDREN.
   6. CLERGYMAN'S WIDOW.
   7. DAUGHTER-IN-LAW.
   8. ELIZABETH.
   9. GOOD GRANDMOTHER.
  10. MERCHANT'S WIDOW.
  11. RICH BOYS AND POOR BOYS.
  12. THE SISTERS.
  13. STOLEN BOY.
  14. WILLIAM AND HIS UNCLE BEN.
  15. YOUNG CRUSOE.

 HOMES OF THE NEW WORLD. Impressions of America. By FREDRIKA BREMER.
 With Illustrations. New Edition.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 HOPKINS' ORTHOGRAPHICAL EXERCISES. New Edition. 18mo. cloth, 1_s._
 6_d._

 HOUSEHOLD OF SIR THOS. MORE (Y^E). Libellus a Margareta More,
 quindecim annos nata, Chelseiæ inceptus. Third Edition, with Portrait.
 Cloth, red edges, 7_s._ 6_d._; morocco antique, 14_s._

 HOW TO WIN LOVE; or, Rhoda's Lesson. A Story Book for the Young.
 By the Author of "Michael the Miner," "Cola Monti," &c. With
 Illustrations on Steel. New Edition, 16mo. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._
 6_d._

 HOWITT (WILLIAM),--A BOY'S ADVENTURES IN THE WILDS OF AUSTRALIA. Cuts
 by HARVEY. New and Cheaper Edition. Fcap. cloth, 4_s._

 HUMBOLDT'S (BARON WILLIAM VON) LETTERS TO A LADY. From the German.
 With Introduction by Dr. STEBBING. Post 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

 HUME AND SMOLLETT'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND, with continuation to 1846,
 by FARR. With Portraits, &c. Three Vols. imperial 8vo. cloth, 2_l._
 12_s._ 6_d._

 HYMNS AND SKETCHES IN VERSE. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE OF THE GREAT INDUSTRIAL EXHIBITION OF 1851,
 published in connexion with the Art Journal, containing upwards of
 Fourteen Hundred Engravings on Wood, and a Frontispiece on Steel. 4to.
 cloth, gilt edges, One Guinea.

 INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL IN CENTRAL AMERICA, CHIAPAS, AND YUCATAN. By J. L.
 STEPHENS. New Edition, by F. CATHERWOOD. With numerous Illustrations,
 8vo. cloth, 12_s._

 INFANT SALVATION; or, All Saved who Die in Infancy. Specially
 addressed to Mothers mourning the Loss of Infants and Children. By
 Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Fourth Edition, fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._

 IRELAND, ITS SCENERY, AND CHARACTER. By MR. and MRS. S. C. HALL. With
 numerous Engravings on Steel, and Five Hundred Woodcuts. New Edition,
 Three Vols. royal 8vo. cloth, 3_l._ 3_s._

 IS CHRISTIANITY FROM GOD? A Manual of Christian Evidences for
 Scripture Readers, Sunday School Teachers, City Missionaries, and
 Young Persons. By Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Tenth Edition, fcap. cloth,
 3_s._

 JACK AND THE TANNER OF WYMONDHAM; a Tale of the Time of Edward VI. By
 the Author of "Mary Powell." Post 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._ (RAILWAY READING.)

 JAY (REV. W.),--FINAL DISCOURSES AT ARGYLE CHAPEL, BATH. Post 8vo.
 cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

 ---- PORTRAITURE OF. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 JERDAN'S (WILLIAM) AUTOBIOGRAPHY; With his Literary, Political, and
 Social Reminiscences and Correspondence, during the last Forty Years,
 as Editor of the "Sun" Newspaper, 1812-17, and of the "Literary
 Gazette," 1817-50, in connexion with most of the Eminent Persons who
 have been distinguished in the past half-century as Statesmen, Poets,
 Authors, Men of Science, Artists, &c. Post 8vo. with Portraits, &c.
 Complete in 4 Vols. cloth, 21_s._

 JERUSALEM REVISITED. By W. H. BARTLETT. Numerous Illustrations on
 steel, and Woodcuts. Super-royal 8vo. cloth, 12_s._; morocco, 21_s._

 JOSEPH; OR, THE LAST OF THE PATRIARCHS. By the REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D.
 Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6_s._

 JULIAN; or, the Close of an Era. By L. F. BUNGENER, Author of "History
 of the Council of Trent." Two Vols. cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

 JUVENILE ANECDOTES; or, Stories of Children. By P. WAKEFIELD. New
 Edition. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 KING ALFRED'S POEMS. Now first turned into English Metre, by Mr.
 TUPPER. Cloth, 3_s._

 LADY MARY AND HER NURSE; or, a Peep into the Canadian Forest. By Mrs.
 TRAILL, Authoress of "The Canadian Crusoes." With Illustrations by
 HARVEY. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges, 5_s._

 LAST OF THE PATRIARCHS (THE); or, Lessons from the Life of Joseph. By
 the Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. F.R.S.E. Fcap. cloth, 6_s._

 LAURIE (JAMES),--TABLES OF SIMPLE INTEREST FOR EVERY DAY IN THE YEAR,
 at 5, 4-1/2, 4, 3-1/2, 3, and 2-1/2 per cent. per annum, from 1_l._ to
 100_l._, &c. Nineteenth Edition, 800 pp. 8vo. cloth, 1_l._ 1_s._

 "In the great requisites of simplicity of arrangement and
 comprehensiveness we have seen none better adapted for general
 use."--_McCulloch's Commercial Dictionary._

 "Mr. Laurie was well known as one of the most correct and industrious
 authorities on commercial calculations, and the practical value of his
 various tables has long been recognised."--_The Times_, _20th Sept.
 1854_.

 ---- TABLES OF SIMPLE INTEREST at 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 9-1/2 per cent.
 per annum, from 1 day to 100 days. Fourth Edition, 8vo. cloth, 7_s._

 LAWRENCE'S (MISS) STORIES FROM THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT. New Edition,
 with Engravings.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 LAWRENCE (F.),--THE LIFE OF HENRY FIELDING; with Notices of his
 Writings, his Times, and his Contemporaries. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._
 6_d._

 LEÇONS POUR DES ENFANTS, depuis l'âge de Deux Ans jusqu'à Cinq. Avec
 une Interprétation Anglaise. By Mrs. BARBAULD. New Edition. 18mo.
 cloth, 2_s._

 LECTURES FOR THE TIMES; or, Illustrations and Refutations of the Errors
 of Romanism and Tractarianism. By Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. New and
 Cheaper Edition, Revised and Corrected, with Additions. Fcap. cloth,
 5_s._

 LECTURES TO YOUNG MEN. By REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. A collected edition,
 with additions.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 LETTERS AND POEMS, selected from the Writings of BERNARD BARTON. With
 MEMOIR, Edited by his DAUGHTER. New Edition, with Portrait. Fcap.
 cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._; large paper, 10_s._

 LETTERS TO A LADY. By BARON WILLIAM VON HUMBOLDT. From the German.
 With Introduction by DR. STEBBING. Post 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

 LEWIS ARUNDEL; or, the Railroad of Life. By F. E. SMEDLEY, ESQ. Author
 of "Frank Fairlegh." Cheap Edition, 3_s._ boards; 4_s._ cloth; or with
 Illustrations by H. K. BROWNE (PHIZ.) 8vo. cloth, 22_s._

 LIFE AND TRAVELS OF ST. PAUL (THE). Described from a Personal Visit
 to the East. By REV. JOHN AITON, D.D. Post 8vo. cloth, 12_s._ With
 Illustrations.

 LIMED TWIGS TO CATCH YOUNG BIRDS. By the Authors of "Original Poems."
 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 LITTLE BOOK OF OBJECTS. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._

 LITTLE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE; containing Useful Information on Common
 Things, for Young Children. By ELIZABETH G. NOVERRE. With Eight
 Illustrations. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 LITTLE WORLD OF LONDON (THE); or, Pictures in Little of London Life.
 By C. M. SMITH. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 LOVE, A REALITY, NOT ROMANCE. By MRS. THOMAS GELDART. With Cuts by
 GILBERT. Fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 3_s._ 6_d._

 MAIDEN AND MARRIED LIFE OF MARY POWELL, afterwards MISTRESS MILTON.
 Third Edition, with Portrait. Post 8vo. cloth, red edges, 7_s._ 6_d._;
 morocco antique, 14_s._

 "This is a charming little book; and whether we regard its subject,
 cleverness, or delicacy of sentiment or expression--to say nothing of
 its type and orthography--it is likely to be a most acceptable present
 to young or old, be their peculiar taste for religion, morals, poetry,
 history, or romance."--_Christian Observer._

 WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

 ---- CALIPH HAROUN ALRASCHID (THE). Post 8vo. antique, 7_s._ 6_d._;
 full gilt, 10_s._

 ---- CHERRY AND VIOLET: a Tale of the Great Plague. Second Edition.
 Post 8vo. cloth, antique, 7_s._ 6_d._

 ---- CHRONICLES OF MERRY ENGLAND. Fcap. 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

 ---- CLAUDE THE COLPORTEUR. With Coloured Frontispiece after WARREN.
 Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 ---- COLLOQUIES OF EDWARD OSBORNE (THE). Second Edition, post 8vo.
 cloth, red edges, 7_s._ 6_d._; morocco antique, 14_s._

 ---- GOOD OLD TIMES (THE). Second Edition, with Frontispiece. Post 8vo.
 cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 ---- THE HILL SIDE. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- JACK AND THE TANNER OF WYMONDHAM. Post 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

 ---- OLD CHELSEA BUN-HOUSE. Post 8vo. cloth, antique, 7_s._ 6_d._;
 morocco, 13_s._

 ---- PROVOCATIONS OF MADAME PALISSY (THE). With Coloured Frontispiece,
 by Warren. Third Edition. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 ---- QUEENE PHILIPPA'S GOLDEN BOOKE. Handsomely bound and gilt, with
 Illuminations.

 ---- SOME ACCOUNT OF MRS. CLARINDA SINGLEHART. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._
 6_d._

 ---- TASSO AND LEONORA.

 ----Y^E HOUSEHOLD OF SIR THO^S. MORE. Third Edition, with Portrait,
 &c., cloth, red edges, 7_s._ 6_d._; morocco antique, 14_s._

 MANUAL (A) OF THE ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE HUMAN MIND. By the
 Rev. J. CARLILE, D.D. Fcap. cloth, 5_s._

 MANUAL OF HERALDRY, being a concise Description of the several Terms
 used, and containing a Dictionary of every Designation in the Science.
 Illustrated by 400 Engravings on Wood. New Edition, fcap. cloth, 3_s._

 MANUAL OF GEOGRAPHY, Physical and Political. For the use of Schools
 and Families, with Questions for Examination. By EDWARD FARR, with
 numerous Illustrations. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._

 MANUAL OF PERSPECTIVE. Illustrated by numerous Engravings. By N.
 WHITTOCK. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._

 MERRIFIELD (MRS.),--DRESS AS A FINE ART. With Illustrations. post 8vo.
 2_s._ 6_d._

 MESSAGE FROM GOD (A); or, Thoughts on Religion for Thinking Men. By
 Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Fourth Edition, fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._

 METEYARD'S (ELIZA) DOCTOR'S LITTLE DAUGHTER. The Story of a Child's
 Life amidst the Woods and Hills. With numerous Illustrations by
 HARVEY. Foolscap, cloth, gilt edges, 7_s._ 6_d._

 ---- DOCTOR OLIVER'S MAID. A Tale of English Life. Reprinted from
 Sharpe's London Magazine.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 M'HENRY'S SPANISH COURSE.-- A NEW AND IMPROVED GRAMMAR, designed
 for every Class of Learners, and especially for Self-instruction.
 Containing the Elements of the Language and the Rules of Etymology and
 Syntax Exemplified; with NOTES and APPENDIX, consisting of Dialogues,
 Select Poetry, Commercial Correspondence, &c. New Edition, Revised.
 12mo. bound, 8_s._

 ---- EXERCISES ON THE ETYMOLOGY, SYNTAX, IDIOMS, &c. of the SPANISH
 LANGUAGE. Fifth Edition, 12mo. bound, 4_s._

 ---- KEY TO THE EXERCISES. 12mo. bound, 4_s._

 ---- SYNONYMES OF THE SPANISH LANGUAGE EXPLAINED. 12mo. and 8vo. 5_s._
 6_d._ each.

 MIALL (EDWARD, M.P.),--BASES OF BELIEF, an Examination of Christianity
 as a Divine Revelation by the light of recognised Facts and
 Principles. In Four Parts. Second Edition, 8vo. cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

 MIRACLES OF NATURE AND MARVELS OF ART.

  LAND CREATION. 14 Engravings.
  THE TROPICS & THE POLES. 10 Engravings.
  NATURE AND ART. 18 Engravings.

 1_s._ each, square boards.

 MONOD (A.),--WOMAN: HER MISSION, AND HER LIFE. Translated from the
 French by Rev. W. G. BARRETT. Second Edition, 18mo. cloth, 1_s._
 6_d._; gilt edges, 2_s._

 ---- SAINT PAUL. Five Discourses. Translated from the French by REV.
 W. G. BARRETT. 18mo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 MOUBRAY'S TREATISE ON DOMESTIC AND ORNAMENTAL POULTRY. New Edition,
 revised and greatly enlarged by L. A. MEALL, with the Diseases of
 Poultry, by Dr. HORNER. With Coloured Illustrations. Fcap. cloth, 8_s._

 MY BOY'S FIRST BOOK. By MISS M. FRAZER TYTLER. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth,
 2_s._ 6_d._

 MY OLD PUPILS. By the Author of "My Schoolboy Days." With Four
 Illustrations on Wood. 16mo. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._ 6_d._

 MY YOUTHFUL COMPANIONS. By the same Author. With Frontispiece. 12mo.
 cloth, 1_s._

 NAOMI; or, the Last Days of Jerusalem. By Mrs. J. B. WEBB. With
 Illustrations by GILBERT, &c. New Edition, Fcap. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 NEW GIFT BOOK FOR YOUTH, with Twenty-six Illustrations. 16mo. boards,
 2_s._ 6_d._

 NILE BOAT (THE); or, Glimpses of the Land of Egypt. By W. H. BARTLETT.
 Illustrated by Thirty-five Steel Engravings and Maps, with numerous
 Cuts. New Edition, super-royal 8vo. cloth, full gilt, 16_s._; morocco
 elegant, 28_s._

 NINA, a Tale by MISS MENELLA BUTE SMEDLEY. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 NINEVEH AND PERSEPOLIS: an Historical Sketch of Ancient Assyria
 and Persia, with an Account of the recent Researches in those
 Countries. By W. S. W. VAUX, M.A. of the British Museum. With numerous
 Illustrations. Fourth Edition, post 8vo. cloth, 8_s._

 OCCASIONAL DISCOURSES. By REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. New Edition. Two
 Volumes, fcap. cloth, 8_s._

 OLD CHELSEA BUN-HOUSE (THE). A Tale of the last Century. By the Author
 of "Mary Powell." With Frontispiece. Post 8vo. bevelled boards,
 antique, 7_s._ 6_d._; morocco, 13_s._

 OLD FOREST RANGER (THE); or, Wild Sports of India on the Neilgherry
 Hills, the Jungles, and on the Plains. By MAJOR WALTER CAMPBELL, of
 Skipness. New Edition, with Illustrations on Steel. Post 8vo. cloth,
 8_s._

 OLD OAK CHEST; or, a Book a Great Treasure. By the Author of
 "Charlie's Discoveries," &c. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 OPEN AND SEE; or, First Reading Lessons. By the Author of "Aids to
 Development," &c. &c. With Twenty-four Engravings on Wood. 16mo.
 cloth, 2_s._

 ORIGINAL POEMS FOR INFANT MINDS. A New and Revised Edition. Two Vols.
 18mo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._ each.

 OUR FATHER; a Manual of Family Prayers for General and Special
 Occasions, with Short Prayers for Spare Minutes, and Passages for
 Reflection. By Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Sixth Edition, fcap. cloth,
 gilt edges, 3_s._

 PAUL PERCIVAL; or, the Young Adventurer. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._
 6_d._

 PAYNE'S (JOSEPH) SELECT POETRY FOR CHILDREN; with brief Explanatory
 Notes, arranged for the use of Schools and Families. Eleventh Edition,
 Corrected and Enlarged. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._; with gilt edges,
 3_s._

 ---- STUDIES IN ENGLISH POETRY; with short Biographical Sketches, and
 Notes Explanatory and Critical, intended as a Text-Book for the higher
 Classes in Schools, and as an Introduction to the Study of English
 Literature. Third and Cheaper Edition. Fcap. cloth, 5_s._

 PHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATIONS, in which are familiarly explained the
 causes of many daily occurring Natural Phenomena. By FREDERICK C.
 BAKEWELL. Third Edition, with Cuts. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 PICTORIAL SPELLING BOOK; or, Lessons on Facts and Objects. With One
 Hundred and Thirty Illustrations. Fifth Edition. 12mo. cloth, 1_s._

 PICTURES FROM SICILY. By W. H. BARTLETT, with Thirty-three Steel
 Engravings, and numerous Woodcuts. Super-royal 8vo. cloth, full gilt,
 16_s._; morocco elegant, 28_s._

 PILGRIMAGES TO ENGLISH SHRINES. By MRS. S. C. HALL. With Notes and
 Illustrations by F. W. FAIRHOLT, F.S.A. New Edition. In One Vol. 8vo.
 cloth, gilt edges, 21_s._; morocco, 28_s._

 PIPPIE'S WARNING; or, the Adventures of a Dancing Dog. By CATHARINE
 CROWE, Author of "Susan Hopley," &c. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth, gilt
 edges, 2_s._ 6_d._

 PLEASANT PASTIME; or, Drawing-Room Dramas for Private Representation
 by the Young. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._ 6_d._

 POOLE'S (MATTHEW) DIALOGUES BETWEEN A POPISH PRIEST AND AN ENGLISH
 PROTESTANT, wherein the principal Points and Arguments of both
 Religions are truly Proposed, and fully Examined. New Edition, with
 the References revised and corrected. By Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. 18mo.
 cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 POPISH INFALLIBILITY. By C. H. COLLETTE. Fcap. sewed, 1_s._

 PROPHETIC STUDIES; or, Lectures on the Book of Daniel. By Rev. JOHN
 CUMMING, D.D. Ninth Thousand. Fcap cloth, full gilt, 9_s._ morocco
 extra, 13_s._

 PROTESTANT CATECHISM (THE); or, the True Christian's Defence against
 the Church of Rome; With an Introductory Essay. By the Rev. R.
 PARKINSON, M.A. Fifth Thousand, revised and enlarged, 18mo. sewed,
 6_d._; or 5_s._ per dozen for distribution.

 PROVOCATIONS OF MADAME PALISSY (THE). By the Author of "Mary Powell."
 With Coloured Frontispiece, by WARREN. Third Edition. Post 8vo. cloth,
 7_s._ 6_d._

 PSALTER OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. Written by ST. BONAVENTURE. Translated
 from the last French Edition of 1852, and carefully compared with the
 Latin, by REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. 12mo. cloth, 2_s._

 PULPIT PSALM BOOK (THE), Edited by the REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Fcap.
 cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._; roan, 5_s._; morocco, 6_s._ 6_d._

 QUEENE PHILIPPA'S GOLDEN BOOKE. Handsomely bound and gilt, with
 Illuminations. By the Author of "Mary Powell." Price 7_s._ 6_d._

 RAILWAY APPLIANCES, in the Nineteenth Century; or, the Rail, Steam,
 and Electricity. With Illustrative Anecdotes, Engravings, and
 Diagrams. Fcap. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 RECOLLECTIONS OF MRS. ANDERSON'S SCHOOL. A Book for Girls. By JANE
 WINNARD HOOPER. Illustrated by FRANKLIN. Fcap. cloth, gilt edges,
 3_s._ 6_d._

 RHYMES FOR THE NURSERY. By the Authors of "Original Poems." 18mo.
 cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 ---- Illustrated Edition, in Large Type. With Sixteen Designs by
 GILBERT. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 RIPPON'S (DR.) SELECTION OF HYMNS FROM THE BEST AUTHORS, including
 a great number of Originals, intended as an Appendix to Dr. Watts'
 Psalms and Hymns. New Editions.

    _Nonpareil 32mo._    |  _Long Primer 24mo._  |    _Large Type._
                  _s. d._|                _s. d._|                _s. d._
  Sheep            1  6  |Sheep            2  8  |Sheep            5  0
  Roan, gilt edges 2  6  |Roan, gilt edges 3  8  |Roan, gilt edges 6  0
  Morocco          5  0  |Morocco          6  0  |Morocco          7  0

 ROAD TO LEARNING; or, Original Lessons in Words of One and Two
 Syllables. With Illustrations. Square boards, 1_s._ 6_d._

 ROBINSON CRUSOE. With Illustrations. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 RODWELL'S (ANN) FIRST STEP TO ENGLISH HISTORY. With many Cuts. New
 Edition, revised, by JULIA CORNER. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ROMAINE'S LIFE, WALK, AND TRIUMPH OF FAITH. 18mo. cloth, 3_s._

 ROMANISM IN ENGLAND EXPOSED. By CHARLES HASTINGS COLLETTE. Second
 Edition, enlarged and improved, fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ROME: REGAL AND REPUBLICAN. A History for Families. By JANE M.
 STRICKLAND. Edited by AGNES STRICKLAND, Authoress of "Lives of the
 Queens of England." With Vignettes. Post 8vo. cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

 ROSALIE; or, "The Truth shall make you Free." An authentic Narrative.
 By MDLLE. R. BERTIN DE PRIESTER. Edited by REV. JOS. RIDGEWAY, A.M. of
 Sydenham. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 ROWBOTHAM'S (J., F.R.S.A.) DERIVATIVE SPELLING BOOK, in which the
 Origin of each Word is given from the Greek, Latin, Saxon, German,
 Teutonic, Dutch, French, Spanish, and other Languages; with the Parts
 of Speech, and Pronunciation accented. 12mo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._

 ---- GUIDE TO THE FRENCH LANGUAGE AND CONVERSATION; consisting of
 Modern French Dialogues, with the Pronunciation of the most difficult
 Words; for the use of Schools, Travellers, and Private Students. A New
 Edition, by DE LA VOYE. 18mo. bound, 2_s._ 6_d._

 RURAL SCENES; or, a Peep into the Country. A New and Revised Edition,
 with Eighty-eight Cuts. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 SABBATH AT HOME. A Short Manual of Devotion, &c. Post 8vo. antique,
 3_s._ 6_d._

 SABBATH EVENING READINGS ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. By the REV. JOHN
 CUMMING, D.D.

 The Four Gospels complete. With Frontispieces. Fcap. cloth, 20_s._

 _The separate Volumes are_--

  ST. MATTHEW. 5_s._
  ST. LUKE. 6_s._
  THE ACTS. 7_s._
  ST. MARK. 3_s._
  ST. JOHN. 6_s._
  ROMANS. 4_s._ 6_d._
  THE CORINTHIANS, publishing in Numbers.

 ---- THE BOOK OF REVELATION. Complete. Second Edition, fcap. cloth,
 7_s._ 6_d._

 SALVATION. A Sermon preached before the Queen by the REV. JOHN
 CUMMING, D.D. Twentieth Thousand, sewed, 6_d._

 SANDERSON (A. R., M.D.),--THOUGHTS AND REFLECTIONS ON SICKNESS AND
 AFFLICTION. Second Edition, fcap. cloth, 5_s._

 SANDFORD AND MERTON. With Cuts. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF MOSES, a Series of Twenty Engravings in
 Outline. Designed by SELOUS and Engraved by ROLLS. In portfolio,
 10_s._ 6_d._

 SCOFFERN'S CHEMISTRY NO MYSTERY; being the Subject Matter of a Course
 of Lectures. Illustrated by Diagrams and Woodcuts. Second Edition,
 revised and corrected, with Index. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 SCOTT (REV. T.),--HOLY BIBLE, with Readings and an Abridged
 Commentary. 16mo. roan, embossed, 4_s._ 6_d._; morocco, 6_s._;
 elegant, 6_s._ 6_d._ Twenty-eight Engravings.

 SCRIPTURE SITES AND SCENES, from actual Survey, in Egypt, Arabia, and
 Palestine. Illustrated by Seventeen Steel Engravings, Three Maps, and
 Thirty-seven Woodcuts. By W. H. BARTLETT. Post 8vo. cloth, gilt edges,
 4_s._

 SELECT POETRY FOR CHILDREN; With brief Explanatory Notes, arranged for
 the use of Schools and Families. By JOSEPH PAYNE. Eleventh Edition,
 corrected and Enlarged. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._; with gilt edges,
 3_s._

 SHARPE'S LONDON JOURNAL. A Miscellany of Entertainment and Instruction
 for General Reading. New Series. Published Monthly, with Two
 Engravings on Steel. Vols. I. to IX. cloth, 6_s._ 6_d._ each.

 ---- Old Series. Volumes I. to IX. cloth, 4_s._ 6_d._ each. Vols. X.
 to XV. 6_s._ 6_d._ each.

 SHELMERDINE'S CHANT BOOK. Fcap. cloth, 1_s._

 SIGNS OF THE TIMES. By the REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. Complete Edition.
 Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 SMEDLEY (F. E.),--FORTUNES OF THE COLVILLE FAMILY; or, a Cloud and its
 Silver Lining. Cuts by PHIZ. Fcap. boards, 1_s._ 6_d._; cloth, 2_s._
 6_d._

 ---- FRANK FAIRLEGH; or, Scenes from the Life of a Private Pupil.
 Post 8vo. boards, 2_s._ 6_d._; cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._; or with Thirty
 Illustrations, by GEORGE CRUIKSHANK, 8vo. cloth, 16_s._

 ---- HARRY COVERDALE'S COURTSHIP. With Illustrations by H. K. BROWNE.
 8vo. cloth, 16_s._

 ---- LEWIS ARUNDEL; or, the Railroad of Life. Post 8vo. 3_s._ boards;
 cloth, 4_s._; or with Illustrations by H. K. BROWNE. (PHIZ.) 8vo.
 cloth, 22_s._

 SMEDLEY (M. B.),--NINA. Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- STORY OF A FAMILY. Two Vols. fcap. 8vo. 10_s._

 ---- THE USE OF SUNSHINE. Second Edition. Fcap. cloth, 5_s._

 SMITH (C. M.),--THE LITTLE WORLD OF LONDON. Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._
 6_d._

 SNAPE (REV. A. W.),--THE GREAT ADVERSARY. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 SOME ACCOUNT OF MRS. CLARINDA SINGLEHART. By the Author of "Mary
 Powell." Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

 SOUTHERN AFRICA. By FLEMING. Post 8vo. cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

 SQUIRRELS AND OTHER ANIMALS; or, Illustrations of the Habits and
 Instincts of many of the smaller British Quadrupeds. By GEORGE WARING.
 With Cuts. 16mo. New Edition.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 ST. PAUL AND HIS LOCALITIES. By REV. JOHN AITON, D.D. With
 Illustrations. Post 8vo. cloth, 12_s._

 STEILL'S PICTORIAL SPELLING BOOK; or, Lessons on Facts and Objects.
 With One Hundred and Thirty Illustrations. Fifth Edition, 12mo. cloth,
 1_s._

 STEPHENS (J. L.),--INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL IN CENTRAL AMERICA, CHIAPAS,
 AND YUCATAN. New Edition, by F. CATHERWOOD. Numerous Illustrations.
 8vo. cloth, 12_s._

 STORY OF A FAMILY. By MISS MENELLA BUTE SMEDLEY. Two Vols. fcap.
 cloth, 10_s._

 STRATAGEMS. By MRS. NEWTON CROSLAND (late CAMILLA TOULMIN). With Cuts.
 16mo. cloth, gilt edges, 2_s._ 6_d._

 STRICKLAND'S (JANE M.) ROME: Regal and Republican. With Vignettes.
 Post 8vo. cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

 STUDIES IN ENGLISH POETRY; with short Biographical Sketches, and Notes
 Explanatory and Critical, intended as a Text-Book for the higher
 Classes in Schools, and as an Introduction to the Study of English
 Literature. By JOSEPH PAYNE. Third Edition, 12mo. cloth, 5_s._

 TABLES OF SIMPLE INTEREST FOR EVERY DAY IN THE YEAR, at 5, 4-1/2, 4,
 3-1/2, 3, and 2-1/2 per cent. per annum, from 1_l._ to 100_l._, &c. By
 JAMES LAURIE. Nineteenth Edition, 800 pp. 8vo. cloth, 1_l._ 1_s._

 "In the great requisites of simplicity of arrangement and
 comprehensiveness we have none better adapted for general
 use."--_McCulloch's Commercial Dictionary._

---- AT 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 9-1/2 per cent. per annum, from 1 day to 100
days. By JAMES LAURIE. Third Edition, 8vo. cloth, 7_s._

TASSO AND LEONORA. The Commentaries of Ser Pantaleone degli Gambacorti,
Gentleman Usher to the august Madame Leonora d'Este. By the Author of
"Mary Powell." Post 8vo. cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

TAYLER (W. ELFE),--HIPPOLYTUS AND THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH AT THE
COMMENCEMENT OF THE THIRD CENTURY. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

TAYLOR'S (EMILY) BOY AND THE BIRDS. With Sixteen fine Woodcuts, from
LANDSEER'S Designs. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

TENT AND ALTAR (THE), or Sketches from Patriarchal Life. By Rev. JOHN
CUMMING, D.D. New Edition. With Vignettes. Fcap. cloth, full gilt, 9_s._

 TOIL AND TRIAL, a Story of London Life. By MRS. NEWTON CROSLAND, (late
 CAMILLA TOULMIN.) With Frontispiece by JOHN LEECH. Post 8vo. 1_s._
 6_d._

 TOMLINSON'S CYCLOPÆDIA OF ARTS. With Illustrations. Two Vols. royal
 8vo. cloth, 45_s._

 TRAILL (MRS.),--CANADIAN CRUSOES; a Tale of the Rice Lake Plains.
 Edited by AGNES STRICKLAND. With numerous Illustrations by HARVEY.
 Fcap. cloth, gilt edges, 6_s._

 ---- LADY MARY AND HER NURSE; or, a Peep into the Canadian Forest,
 with a History of the Squirrel Family. With Illustrations by HARVEY.
 One Vol. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges, 5_s._

 TRAVELS ON THE SHORES OF THE BALTIC, &c. By S. S. HILL, Author of
 "Travels in Siberia." Post 8vo. cloth, 8_s._ 6_d._

 TREDGOLD ON THE STEAM ENGINE. A New Edition. Four Vols. cloth, 4_l._
 14_s._ 6_d._

 TRUTH IS EVERYTHING. By MRS. GELDART. Frontispiece. Second Edition.
 Fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges, 3_s._

 TUPPER'S (MARTIN F., D.C.L. F.R.S.) BALLADS FOR THE TIMES, now first
 collected. American Lyrics, Geraldine, Modern Pyramid, Hactenus, A
 Thousand Lines, and other Poems. Third Edition, with Vignette, and
 Frontispiece, uniform with "Proverbial Philosophy." Fcap. cloth, 7_s._
 6_d._

 ---- KING ALFRED'S POEMS. Now first turned into English Metre. Fcap.
 cloth, 3_s._

 ---- LYRICS. Second Edition. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 ---- THE CROCK OF GOLD, THE TWINS, AND HEART. With Illustrations by
 JOHN LEECH. New and cheaper Edition, post 8vo. cloth, 5_s._

 Each of the above Tales may be had separately, in limp cloth, price
 1_s._ 6_d._

 ---- PROVERBIAL PHILOSOPHY, Translated into French. Portrait. Fcap.
 cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 TYTLER'S (MISS M. FRAZER) MY BOY'S FIRST BOOK. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth,
 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- HYMNS AND SKETCHES IN VERSE. With Cuts. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 ---- TALES OF MANY LANDS. With Illustrations. New Edition.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 USE OF SUNSHINE (THE), a Christmas Story. By M. B. SMEDLEY. Second
 Edition. Fcap. cloth, 5_s._

 VAUX'S (W. S. W., M.A.) NINEVEH AND PERSEPOLIS; an HISTORICAL
 SKETCH of ANCIENT ASSYRIA and PERSIA, with an Account of the recent
 Researches in those Countries. Fourth Edition, with numerous
 Illustrations. Post 8vo. cloth, 8_s._

 VERNON GALLERY OF BRITISH ART. Edited by S. C. HALL, ESQ. F.S.A.

 In 4 volumes, folio, cloth, gilt edges, 2_l._ 2_s._ each.

 WAKEFIELD'S (PRISCILLA) FAMILY TOUR THROUGH THE BRITISH EMPIRE. A New
 Edition, revised. With a Map. 12mo. cloth, 6_s._

 ---- JUVENILE ANECDOTES; or, Stories of Children, 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 ---- JUVENILE TRAVELLERS; a Tour throughout Europe. A New Edition.
 With a Map. 12mo. cloth, 6_s._

 ---- INSTINCT DISPLAYED in the Animal Creation. A New and Revised
 Edition, with many Additions. Foolscap. New Edition.

                                                     [_In preparation._

 WALKS ABOUT JERUSALEM AND ITS ENVIRONS. By W. H. BARTLETT. Illustrated
 by Twenty-four Engravings on Steel, Two Maps, and many Woodcuts. New
 Edition, super-royal 8vo. cloth, full gilt, 12_s._; morocco elegant,
 21_s._

 "We have, at length, in this attractive volume, the _desideratum_ of a
 complete picturesque guide to the topography of Jerusalem."--_Patriot._

WATTS'S (DR.) DIVINE AND MORAL SONGS FOR CHILDREN. With Anecdotes and
Reflections, by the Rev. INGRAM COBBIN, M.A. With Frontispiece and
Fifty-seven Woodcuts. New Edition, cloth, 1_s._; gilt edges, 1_s._ 6_d._

WEBB'S (MRS. J. B.) NAOMI; or, the Last Days of Jerusalem. With View
and Plan of Jerusalem. New Edition. Illustrated by GILBERT. Fcap.
cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

WEEK AT KILLARNEY (A), By MR. and MRS. S. C. HALL. Being a Guide for
Tourists to the Lakes of Killarney. With Twenty Engravings on Steel,
and One Hundred and Ten on Wood. New Edition, 4to. cloth, 8_s._

WELLINGTON; a Lecture by the REV. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. New and Enlarged
Edition, fcap. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

WHEELER'S (J. T., F.R.G.S.) HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE OLD AND NEW
TESTAMENTS. Illustrated with Five coloured Maps, and large View of
Jerusalem, with a Plan of the Ancient City. Folio, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

---- ANALYSIS AND SUMMARY OF OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY AND THE LAWS
OF MOSES, with a Connexion between the Old and New Testaments, an
Introductory Outline of the Geography, Political History, &c. Fourth
Edition, post 8vo. cloth, 5_s._ 6_d._

 WHEELER'S (J. T., F.R.G.S.) ANALYSIS AND SUMMARY OF NEW TESTAMENT
 HISTORY, including, 1. The Four Gospels harmonized into one continuous
 Narrative. 2. The Acts of the Apostles, and continuous History of
 St. Paul. 3. An Analysis of the Epistles and Book of Revelation.
 4. An Introductory Outline of the Geography, Critical History,
 Authenticity, Credibility, and Inspiration of the New Testament. The
 whole Illustrated by copious Historical, Geographical, and Antiquarian
 Notes, Chronological Tables, &c. Third Edition, revised. Post 8 vo.
 cloth, 5_s._ 6_d._

 ---- A POPULAR ABRIDGMENT OF OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT HISTORY, for
 Schools, Families, and General Reading. Explained by Historical and
 Geographical Illustrations, and numerous Map Diagrams. Two Vols. 18mo.
 cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ each.

 WHITTOCK'S (N.) MANUAL OF PERSPECTIVE. Illustrated by numerous
 Engravings. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._

 WILKIE GALLERY (The); a Series of Sixty-six Line Engravings from the
 best paintings of the late SIR DAVID WILKIE, R.A., with Biographical
 and Critical Notices, a Biography, and Portrait of the Painter. 4to.
 cloth, gilt edges, 3_l._ 10_s._

 WILLEMENT (E. E.),--A CATECHISM OF FAMILIAR THINGS. New Edition, 12mo.
 cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

 WILLIE FRASER; or, the Little Scotch Boy: and other Tales. By Mrs. R.
 LEE. With Four Illustrations. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

 WINNARD'S (JANE) (MRS. HOOPER) RECOLLECTIONS OF MRS. ANDERSON'S
 SCHOOL. a Book for Girls. Illustrated by FRANKLIN. Fcap. cloth, gilt
 edges, 3_s._ 6_d._

 WINTER EVENINGS; or, Tales of Travellers. By MARIA HACK. New Edition,
 with Illustrations. Fcap. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

 WOMAN: HER MISSION, AND HER LIFE. From the French of MONOD. By Rev. W.
 G. BARRETT. Second Edition, 18mo. cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges, 2_s._

 WOODWARD'S (B. B., B.A.) HISTORY OF WALES. From the Earliest Times to
 its Final Incorporation with England; with Notices of its Physical
 Geography, and the Poetry, Tradition. Religion, Arts, Manners, and
 Laws of the Welsh, with Fifteen Steel Plates. Super-royal 8vo. cloth,
 1_l._ 5_s._

 WRIGHT'S (THOMAS, ESQ. M.A. F.S.A.) THE CELT, THE ROMAN, AND THE
 SAXON. A History of the Early Inhabitants of Britain, down to the
 Conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. Illustrated by the
 Ancient Remains brought to light by recent research. With numerous
 Engravings. Post 8vo. cloth, 8_s._

 YOUNG NATURALIST'S BOOK OF BIRDS. By PERCY B. ST. JOHN. A New Edition,
 with Sixteen Woodcuts. 16mo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._


_R. Clay, Printer, Bread Street Hill._




FOOTNOTES


[A] The reigning emperor.

[B] The archduke John.

[1] A wild mountain cry.

[C] Bisson had the command at Mantua when Hofer was shot.

[D] _i.e._, kettle: a deep circular valley, shut in by hills.

[E] This incident really occurred between the Passeyr and Meran.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

Obvious punctuation mistakes were corrected.

Variations in spelling remain as in the original unless noted below.

  Page 14, "will" changed to "Will."
  Page 103, opening quotation mark added.
  Page 106, closing quotation marks after "1809" fixed.
  Page 187, "fidgetty" changed to "fidgety."
  Page 237, "recal" changed to "recall."
  Page 262, "chid" changed to "chide."
  Page 283, "GEOLOGIGAL" changed to "GEOLOGICAL."
  Catalogue of Works, page 2, page 13, "ENFANS" changed to "ENFANTS."
  Catalogue of Works, page 9, "dges" changed to "edges."
  Catalogue of Works, page 9, "loth" changed to "cloth."
  Catalogue of Works, page 12, page 15, two instances of superscript "E"
    have been transcribed as "^E."
  Catalogue of Works, page 15, one instance of superscript "S" has been
    transcribed as "^S."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Year Nine, by Anne Manning

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YEAR NINE ***

***** This file should be named 49290-8.txt or 49290-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/2/9/49290/

Produced by Shaun Pinder, Elisa and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

